
\ 5 ~ · · I V P Series   in   Contemporary
Jesus
Christ
and
History
by'
George Eldon Ladd
Do es   hi story  mean  anyt hing?  Are   plan  and   pur pose   dis cernibl e
in  its  ongoing  course?  Or  does   Albert   Camus  refer   apt ly  to  "t he
savage,   forml ess  movement  of   history"?
What   is  Cod's   relation   to  history?  Does   the   Eternal   invade   the
temporal?  Can   th e  Absolute   be  known  in  historical   rel at iviti es?
Must   God  break  into  history?
According  to  the  aut hor, "The  pu fl)ose  of   t his  little  book-is  to set
fort h t he biblical view of God and his tory and  to expound  the  role
of  the second  coming of Christ   in  thi s -bihlicul per specti ve,"
In  thus  relating  hist ory   and   escha tology,   Dr.   Ladd  deals   wit h  a
problem  that   is  crucial   for   th e   Juistian  and  the   world.   As   Dr.
Bromilev writes  in  the  preface  to  t his  little  book : " It   is  indeed  a
tract   for   th e  times,   coucent ratin  r   the   fruits   of   biblical   and  theo-
lo!!ical   study  and  applying  them  to  th e  needs  of   the hour, which
are  busicnl lv  the  needs  of   everv  human   hour. "
.   . ~ - - - - - _ . __ . ~ - -
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
IVP Series in Contemporary Christian Thought
Christianity and Philosophy by  Dr. Arthur F.   Holmes,
Director of Philosophy, Wheaton College
EmU Brunnef':   An  Introduction  to  the   Man  and  His
Thought by  Dr. Paul K. Jewett,   Associate Professor of
Systematic Theology, Fuller Theological Seminary
Christianity   and   Aesthetics   by   Dr.   Clyde   S.   Kilby,
Professor   and   Chairman,   Department   of   English,
Wheaton College
Christianity  and Sex  by  Dr.   Stuart   Barton  Babbage,
Professor   Elect   of   Christian   Apologetics,   Columbia
'Theological Seminary; Principal,   Ridley College, Mel-
bourne;   formerly, Dean,   St. Andrew's  Cathedral,  Syd-
ney, and St. Paul's Cathedral, Melbourne
An  Interpretation  of Karl  Barth  by   Dr.   Kenneth  S.
Kantzer,   Professor of Bible, Chairman of the  Division
of Bible and Philosophy, Wheaton College
H you wish, you may enter a subscription for the series,
so that you may be sure to  receive, on approval,   each
new  booklet   as   it   is   published.   Write   Inter-Varsity
Press, 1519 North  Astor, Chicago  10, Illinois.
Jesus
Christ
and
History
by
George Eldon Ladd
ProfessM of Biblical TheolDgy
Fuller TheolDgical Seminary
Inter-Varsity Preas   •   Chicago 10
Library of Congress catalog cardnumber:  68-8556
Copyright ® 1963 by Inter-Varsity  Christian  Fellowship,
Chicago  10.   All  rights reserved.   No  part of this  booklet
may be  reprodwed in any form whatever  (except for brief
qf.lOlations  in  reviews)   without   written  permission of
Inter-Varsity Preu.
Unle88  otherwise noted,   Scripture  quotations Me  from the  Be-
oised Standard Version of the  Bible, copyrighted 1946 and  1 9 5 ~
by the  Division of  Christian Education of  the  National   Council
of Churches, and  used by permilBion.
The  quotation  on  pages 10  and  11  from  John Wick  BOf.OfI'tIJ3.
Prophetic  Realism and  the Gospel,   copyright 1955, W.   L.16ft..
kina,   is used  by  permi88ion of the  Westminster  Pr888.
Cover design  by Jack Sidebotham
Printed in the  united States of America
Preface
ONLY  a  few  decades  ago  the  problems  of  history  and
eschatology might have seemed remote from each other.
Eschatology was  a  final chapter  in  dogmatic  theology
which to  many bore  little relation to  the  actual march
of historical events.  Or it was a special development in
the biblical world which could excite the detached and
often cynical interest oaly of a few specialists. Or it was
a  preserve  of   Bible  students  whose  historical  interest
lay  in  the  "prophetic" interpretation. of  current events
or the construction of a final chronology.
Today, however, the situation is very  different.   By a
strange and fruitful interaction of theological develop-
ment and actual historical events, the problem of escha-
tology has become a crucial one both for the Christian
world  and  the  world  at   large.   The  human  story  has
been   and  has  had  to  be,   reconsidered  in  an  eschato- ,
logical light.
Many  forces   and  factors   have   combined  to   bring
about   this   result.   In  the   theological   world,   it   is   the
product of a new and  more  genuinely historical study
of the  Bible, and of an  accompanying criticism  of  the
humanistic optimism which so often passed for Christi-
anity prior to  the first world  war.   In the  world of his-
torical development, it is the product of the catastrophic
[v
EX LIBRIS ELTROPICAL
PREFACE
Contents
60
7
50
1
16
. 27
SUGGESTED FURTHER READINGS.
IV. The Unfolding Biblical Perspective .
V. The Second Coming and the Present Lordship 45
of Christ.
. • •
VI. The Second Coming and History.
1. The Philosophy of History .
II. The Second Coming of Christ in Debate .
Ill. The Biblical Presuppositions
events of the century which have made nonsense of the
Liberal reading of history and demanded a more au-
thentic Christianity in place of "de-eschatologized"
presentations.
The point is that both theology and life have put to
us afresh, and in the acutest possible form, the problem
of the meaning of history. They have put this question
in such a way that, if we are to escape either the scepti-
cism of futility or the illusion of Marxist apocalyptic,
only an eschatological solution will suffice.
The gospel is this eschatological solution. Thisis the
theme, and the significance, of the present book. This
is why it merits the most urgent and diligent attention
of readers. It opens up for us an eschatology which is
evangelistic rather than esoteric. It claims us for the
only truly biblical, and the only truly relevant, message
of the reconciling action of God centered in Jesus
Christ. It is indeed a tract for the times, concentrating
the fruits of biblical and theological study and applying
them to the needs of the hour, which are basically the
needs of every human hour.
GEOFFREY W. BROMILEY
Professor ofChurch History
Fuller Theological Seminat'Y
vi]
[vii
I.   The Philosophy of History
THE  PHn.JpPIAN  JAlLER  asked  Paul,   "What  must   I   do
to be saved?"  (Acts 16:30). Today  the  question has as-
sumed  a new form:   "Is there any  salvation for the  hu-
man  race?"  For  modem  man,   the   sense  of  being  lost
seldom focuses on the fear of losing heaven after death;
it   consists rather  of a  sense  of the  meaninglessness  of
present existence, of the  emptiness of life. This feeling
of  personal   futility  is but the  individual  and  personal
expression of the loss of meaning in history as a whole.
To  many,   living   seems   without   significance  because
history  itself   appears  to  lack  purpose   and  destiny.
What  is the  meaning and  goal of history?  No more
important question can  be asked  today  than that.   The
form  of  the   contemporary  question  is  a  modem  one.
Outside of the  Hebrew-Christian tradition, the  ancient
world  ignored  the   issue.   In  ancient   Semitic  religions,
the pagan gods were deities, known in and through the
processes   of   nature  and   more   or   less  identified   with
these  processes.   The   great   Greek  thinkers   sought   for
meaning in the realm of ideas rather than in the flowof
history.   Hesiod  saw  a  process  of  degeneration  in  his-
tory  from  a  golden  to  an  iron  age.   Plato  looked  upon
the  course of time  as a series of cycles, each  of which
begins through the  activity  of a  creative  absolute as a
[1
IVP   SERIES   I   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
Golden Age  and  deteriorates  under  the  hand  of  Fate;
following   its   destruction,   the   absolute   starts   another
cycle.   Aristotle   noted   the   circular   movement   of   the
firmament   and  concluded  that   the  necessary  coming-
to-be  of everything was  a  circular motion. Theo Preiss
goes so far  as to  say that, with few  exceptions, «all the
known metaphysical systems imply or profess a cyclical
vision of time"   (Life in Christ, p. 63). The great Greek
and   Roman   historians,   Herodotus,   Thucydides,   Po-
Iybius,   Livy,   and  Tacitus  believed  that the  lessons  of
the past could give wisdom for the present; but none of
them  found  a  purpose  or   goal   in  history.
The   Middle   Ages   were   dominated   by   a   Christian
philosophy  of   history  that   stemmed  from  Augustine's
City of God.  This   classic  was  Augustine's  apology for
the Catholic church standing over against the decaying
Roman empire.   These two  great societies,   the religious
and the secular, were viewed as the city of God versus
the city of men.   The city  of God,   consisting of all true
Christians,   has   its   visible   expression  in   the   Catholic
church,  and is to  be  supreme over the  city of men.   In
fact,   Augustine interpreted the millennial rule of Christ
in Revelation 20:4 as the present reign of Christ through
the   church  in   the   world.   Since   the   church  was   the
medium of Christ's actual reign in the world, it must be
supreme  over  all  human institutions  and  demand  sub-
mission  of   the  city  of  men.
The rise of the modem scientific outlook rejected all
attempts to understand history in terms of the Christian
faith,   insisting  that  the study of  history should be  ap-
proached with pure objectivity. The scientific  study of
2]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
history  claimed  one  concern:   to  discover  the  facts   as
they  actually  happened,   freed  from  dogmatic  and  ec-
clesiastical   interpretations.   However,   such  dedication
to facts became itself an interpretation of history, for it
demanded  that   truth  must  be  sought   elsewhere  than
in  history. As Lessing put it,   "The accidental truths of
history can never become the proof of necessary truths
of   reason."   Truth  must   be   absolute   and  unchanging;
history by definition has to do with the relative and the
contingent.   Therefore  one  must   seek  for   truth  in  the
sphere  of  reason  or  human spirit,   not  in  the  ceaseless
flux of   history.
Hegel  attempted  to  understand  all history in  terms
of mind or reason.   The real is the rational, and mind is
at work throughout the universe in an evolutionary de-
velopment. Thus history is the history of mind or spirit
unfolding itself through a rhythmic process of opposing
forces   which  ever   emerge   into  new  syntheses.   Karl
Marx reversed Hegel's view of reality by making matter
rather than mind or spirit the only  reality; but he  bor-
rowed Hegel's dialectical principle of struggle between
conHicting  forces   producing  new  syntheses  to  fashion
a  materialistic view  of historical evolution,   the  goal  of
which is the dictatorship of the proletariat in a classless
society.
In  the   nineteenth  century   especially  in   Germany,
many  Christian  historians   tried  to   apply  a   rigid  sci-
entific  historical method to  the  study of  the  Bible.   As
a result,  they found the truth of the  gospel,   not in  the
events   or   movement   of   history,   but   in   the   religious
consciousness or in universal values. Adolf von Harnack
[3
IVP   SERIES   I   CONTEMPORARY   C H R I ~ T I A N THOUGHT   JESUS   CHRIST   AND  HISTORY
God has done or will do in history; it is something God
does   in   my  present   historicity.   The   cross  of   Christ
means my death to myoid life; His resurrection means
myresurrection into the new life of authentic existence.
Here   alone  can  meaning  be   found-in  the   events   of
my  historical  existence  (Geschichte).
Followers of Bultmann feel that he has gone too far
in severing the existential encounter  (Geschichte)  from
the   historical   Jesus   (Historie ) .   They   are   therefore
now  engaged  in  a  new  quest   for  the  historical  Jesus,
using new  concepts  of history. They  refer  to  Colling-
wood, who has argued  that history has an outside and
an  inside.   Objective  positivistic  lllstory  is  concerned
only with  the  outside. A deeper dimension belongs to
the inside of events. Thus the  thought expressed in an
event is more important than  the  event  itself, and  the
historian must  seek to  experience afresh  the  thoughts
embodied  in  past   events. Historical  knowledge is  the
knowledge of what mind has done in the past, and the
historian must try to reenact the past in his own mind.
By  the   use   of   such   concepts   of   history,   the   "post-
Bultmannians"   are   trying   to   recover   the   historical
Jesus, who  will be relevant   for  modem  faith,   by  dis-
covering in him the  same concept of existence which
they  find in  the  gospel.
In   these   modem   interpretations   of   the   gospel,
whether Harnack's liberalismor Bultmann's existential-
ism, the  second coming of Christ  can play no possible
role. Harnack  considered such apocalyptic ideas to  he
the   husk  of   Jesus'   first-century  Jewish  environment,
[5
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
which the prophet of necessity used to convey the true
kernel  of  the  eternal   gospel. Modem  men  must   strip
off the  husk and  preserve  the  gospel.
For   the   existential   interpretation,   the   essential   is
alone that which happens in my existence. The nones-
sential includes all  of the  biblical  accounts  of  the  al-
leged  objective acts  of  God  in  history,   including  the
accounts of the  incarnation,   the  resurrection,   and  the
second   coming   of   Christ.   Such   alleged   events   are
mythological in character; therefore the gospel must be
"demythologized"; i.e., it must be relieved of this bur-
den  of mythological acts of God,   not Simply by reject-
ing  out   of hand  such  concepts  as  did  liberalism, but
by seeking out the idea of existence which they reflect,
By the  use of this idea  of existence, the  gospel is pre-
served, freed fromits first-centuryfreight of mythology.
When we  turn from this survey of modem  ideas of
history to the Bible's view of history, we must bestruck
by the fact  that the  Bible constantly looks both  back-
ward  and  forward.   In  the  Old  Testament   Israel   c0n-
stantly   looked  backward   to   God's   deliverance   from
bondage in Egypt;   but she also looked forward to  the
coming of God's kingdom. The  New Testament   looks
back  to  Christ's   death   and   resurrection;   but   it   also
looks forward  constantly  to  His  second  coming. The
question  which  we  must   ask  is,   therefore,   a  twofold
question: What is the Bible's view of history, and what
is the  meaning of the  second coming of Christ in this
historical perspective? Is the  second coming of Christ
essential  or   unessential   in  the   biblical   view?  Under-
lying these  questions is an  even more profound  QUe5-
6]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
tion: What kind of a God is the God of the Bible? Is He
the Lord of history who works in history, and who has
a goal for history? Or is He a God who is known only as
He speaks to individual men? The purpose of this little
book is to set forth the biblical view of God and history
and to expound the role of the second coming of Christ
in  this biblical  perspective.
II.   The Second Coming of Christ
in Debate
APPROACHING  THE  SUBJECT  of  the  Bible's view of  the
goal of history, we find biblical scholarship engaged in
a livelydebate about the meaning of the second coming
of Christ. In fact,   for the  past  fifty years New Testa-
ment  theology has struggled to know what  to do with
the   New  Testament teaching  of  Christ's  coming. We
have  already  seen that   the  liberalism of scholars like
Harnack was able  to strip away such apocalyptic 1 no-
tions with no sense of loss. Harnack felt that the kernel
of  the   gospel  could  be  safely  preserved  without   the
1 "Apocalyptic"  is  a  technical   term  designating  the   kind  of  escha-
tology which- conceives of  God's  kingdom  as  coming from  outside  of
histOry,   by  a  cosmic act   of   God  that   disrupts   the  present  order  and
inaugurates  the   final perfect order.   "Eschatology"  is a  more  compre-
hensive  term  which includes  all ideas  about the  final destiny of both
the individual soul and the  human  race.
[7
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
husks of eschatological concepts. Jesus was reduced  to
an ethical teacher  compatible with nineteenth-century
standards.
However, this idealized picture of Jesus was shattered
by  the  work  of  Albert   Schweitzer. Schweitzer  is  un-
questionably  one   of   the   greatest   minds   and   noblest
humanitarians  of our century.   One  of the  areas of his
fame is theology. He has given the world an interpreta-
tion of Jesus which has made it impossibleto strip away
the role of eschatology in his teaching, but he has done
it   in  such  a  way  as  to  undermine   the   confidence of
many   in   the   historical   foundations   of   the   Christian
faith.
Schweitzer interprets Jesus, not as the incarnate Son
of   God,   but   as   a   Jewish  apocalyptic   preacher   who
came to his own people to warn them that God's judg-
ment  was about   to fall, that the  end  of the  world was
about to take place, and that human history was about
to be cut off in a great apocalyptic conHagration. Jesus
conceived  his  mission to  be  that   of   proclaiming  the
imminent   end  of  the   world  and  rousing  Israel   to  re-
pentance to be ready for the coming kingdom. He did
not come to tell men how to live in this world. He came
only to warn  them  that   time had  run  out   and  to  pre-
pare  them for the  imminent inbreaking  of God's king-
dom. This end did not occur. History did not end. The
kingdom  did  not   come. God  did  not   act.   Jesus  died
upon  the  cross with  a  plaintive  cry of frustration  and
despair on his lips: "My God, my God, why hast  thou
forsaken me?"   (Matthew  27:46).   He  was, in  short,   a
deluded  Jewish fanatic  who died  a martyr  to his own
8]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
fanciful   delusions.   Schweitzer   concludes   his   famous
study by saying that the historical Jesus, the  man who
actually lived and  taught in Palestine, is of no help  to
modem  man, but is an offense to  modem  religion be-
cause his views were completely alien to modem con-
cepts  of history.
Several   theologians   have   attempted   to   meet   this
problem  by  reinterpreting  eschatology, including  the
doctrine   of   Christ's   second  coming,   in   terms   which
would   be   acceptable   and   meaningful   to   twentieth-
century   man.   C.   H.   Dodd   has   given   us   "Realized
Eschatology."   The   gospel   is   indeed   eschatological;
eschatology, however, denotes  not   the  last   things  but
the  ultimate  things. Eschatology is concerned with  re-
ligious finality, not with the  temporal end. In  the  mes-
sage, person, and work of Christ, all the Old Testament
prophets'   promises of a redeemed  society are  realized.,
but in  radically reinterpreted form. The  real   meaning
of eschatology is discovered in terms not of the future
but of the eternal. The kingdom of God is not an order
of existence which stands at   the  end of history; it   lies
altogether  beyond history, above history, for it belongs
to the eternal, not the  temporal. It is the  Absolute, the
"whollyother." In the "eschatological"events of the gos-
pel,   the   eternal   has   entered  into   the   temporal;   the
"wholly other"  has  entered  into  time  and  space.   The
biblical   terminology about   the   Son of  Man  sitting  at
the  right   hand of God and  coming with  the  clouds is
not meant   to be  taken literally. It is a symbolical way
of   describing   suprasensible,   suprahistorical   realities,
which in Christ have become available to men living in
[9
IVP SERIES / CONTEMPORARY CHRISTIAN THOUGHT
time and space. There can be no future "coming" of
the Son of Man, for there is no before or after in the
eternal order. Eternal realities cannot be confined in
the categories of time.
An influential American theologian, Professor John
Wick Bowman, has given us an interpretation of es-
chatology which he calls Prophetic Realism. God's
kingdom is the rule of God in this world on the planeof
history. This note resounds again and again. In Bow-
man's view, the apocalyptic perverts the biblical mes-
sage, for it relegates the kingdom of God to a realm
outside of or beyond history. He is equally critical of
all nee-orthodox theologians whose view of revelation
will not let them conceive of God working within his-
tory; Any theology which presents God as "wholly
other," standing over against man rather than entering
into dialogue with man, Bowman describes as "apoca-
lyptic pessimism." Albert Schweitzer's altogether futur-
istic interpretation of eschatology is also "apocalyptic
pessimism," for it, like nee-orthodoxy, cannot conceive
of the kingdom of God on the plane of history.
Schweitzer places the kingdom beyond history; neo-
orthodoxy places it above history. Bowman places it
within history.
Bowman's interpretation of the end of history is ex-
pressed in eloquent, almost poetic words. "There will
be an end to history because its stage will be no more.
The theater bums down; so the actors wrap themselves
in their cloaks and go homel Homel-That is exactly
where they do go. Home for the believer is where God
is; home stands for fellowship with God." (Prophetic
10]
JESUS CHRIST AND HISTORY
Realism and the Gospel, P: 270). This view needs no
second coming of Christ. One day, human history will
end, for the stage of history-the earth-will be no
more. The redeemed will leave the earth to spend eter-
nity with God. This sounds very much like a Greek con-
cept of immortality.
The most influential continental reinterpretation of
eschatology is that of Rudolf Bultmann. Although he
has now completed his active teaching career, Bult-
mann's views are just beginning to make a strong im-
pact on the En;lish-speaking world. We have already
seen that Bultmann considers eschatological ideas of
the coming of Christ to establish his kingdom to be
mythological and insists they must be "demytholo-
gized." To Bultmann, the term eschatology does not
mean the final accomplishment of the will of God either
at the end of or within human history. It designates,
rather, the realization of the true meaning of personal,
human existence. Eschatology, which traditionally has
dealt with the "last things" in terms of the human race,
refers rather to that which has ultimate meaning for
individual existence. In the eschatological experience
of salvation, the individual is brought to the end of his
old world and ushered into a new world that is one of
complete openness to God. God is experienced in
terms of one's own truest existence. As to the future of
human history, Bultmann is agnostic (see p. 4). The
second coming of Christ is not an event that gives
meaning to the course of history. Meaning is to be
found only within the individual's "eschatological"
experience. The idea of a Heavenly Being coming to
[11
IVP SERIES / CONTEMPORARY CHRISTIAN THOU,CHT
bring history to its end (the second coming of Christ)
belongs to a mythological world view that modem
man cannot accept. The truth embodied in this escha-
tological mythology must be reinterpreted in terms of
individual eschatological experience. This process of
            biblical mythology is called "demytholo,
glzmg.
When we tum to more orthodox theologians to ask
        meanin?      second coming of Christ and
   role m the BIbles VIew of history, we are again
dismayed by the diversity of interpretation.
The hope of Christ's coming has too often become a
subject of controversy and debate within the church.
Orthodox theologians frequently have been more con-
cerned with the order of events that will attend the
return of the Lord than with the fact itself and its role
in the biblical view of history. Several different views
may be identified. One of the oldest forms of eschato-
logical expectation is found in Irenaeus (cir. A.D. 2(0),
whose writings contain the first extensive extant inter-
pret.ation.of the Christian hope. The second coming of
Christ will not bring about the immediate end of
earthly existence. It will be followed by a final era of
human history, when the kingdom of Christ will be
manifested in the world for a thousand-year period
before the Bnal consummation. This so-called "millen-
nial" 2 interpretation is based on Revelation 20, and the
thousand-year reign of Christ with His saints in Revela-
    .20:4 is understood to refer to a literal period
WIthin human history after Christ's return. Only at the
2 "Millennium" means a thousand years.
12]
JESUS CHRIST AND HISTORY
end of the millenniumwill the final consummation take
place. Only then will death and evil be destroyed and
the present order of existencereplaced by a new heaven
and a new earth. This view has come to be known as
premillennialism, for it anticipates the return of Christ
before His millennial kingdom.
A modem variant of this view interprets the millen-
nial reign of Christ primarily in terms of Israel rather
than the Church. This view is called dispensationalism.
It holds that there are two peoples of God, Israel and
the Church, through whom God is carrying out two
different purposes. God's program for Israel is found
in the Old Testament and is primarily earthly and
theocratic. It is God's purpose to display His power and
glory to the entire world through the destiny of the na-
tion Israel. On the other hand, God's purpose for the
Church is spiritual and redemptive. During the Church
age, God has temporarily broken oft His dealings with
Israel and is forming the Church. But at the end of
this "great parenthesis" when His purpose for the
Church is complete, God will resume His dealings with
Israel. The Jews will be restored to Palestine as a na-
tion, the Old Testament cultic order of temple and
sacri.fices will be reconstituted, and Christ as the Da-
vidic King of Israel will reign from Jerusalem over the
world.
Premillennialismand dispensationalismare closelyre-
lated but not synonymous terms. Dispensationalism is
a variant form of premillennialism. All dispensational-
ists will be premillennialists, but many premillennialists
are not dispensationalists. What may be called historic
[13
[15
IVP SERIES / CONTEMPORARY CHRISTIAN THOUGHT
premillennialism understands the millennial age to be
a further manifestation of the same redemptive kingdom
of God now experienced by the Church, rather than a
restoration of the Jewish order. There is therefore an
important theological difference between dispensa-
tionalism and premillennialism.
Many theologians feel that biblical eschatology ex-
cludes any millennial period after the return of the
     J:lis return will bring God's redemptive purposes
Immediately to their consummation, ushering in at
once the eternal order of the new heaven and the new
earth. This view is called amillennialism because it
denies any literal millennial kingdom on earth. The
:<thousand years" when Christ reigns with His saints
IS a symbol of the Church age. The reign refers either
to the working of Christ's kingdom in the world
thr?ugh  Church, or else to the reign of martyred
believers m heaven during the Church age.
Another view postpones the second coming of Christ
into the distant future. It expects the kingdom of God
to  established in this world by the Church's procla-
mation of the redeeminggospel. The power of the
gospel entrusted to the Church is able not only to save
men, but also to transform the entire social order. It is
the:efore         of the Church, through the power
        . In Its supernatural redeeming gospel, to
ehristianize the entire social order and usher in the
               s kingdom before the coming of
?hrist. This VIew is called postmiUennialism, because
It postpones the return of Christ until after the «millen-
nium" or the achievement of God's kingdom on earth.
14]
JESUS CHRIST AND HISTORY
Because of such differences of interpretation, the
truth of the Lord's return has often been a subject of
controversy. These several views embody different
philosophies of history. postmillennialism expects the
kingdom of God to be established by the Church's
proclamation of the gospel. Dispensationalism expects
the kingdom of God to include a restoration of Judaism.
Premillennialism expects a realization of God's kingdom
within history which amillennialism denies.
In the face of these several modem reinterpretations
of history and eschatology, and in view of the great
diversity of opinion even among conservative scholars,
the thoughtful Christian must ask, What is the deeper
meaning of the biblical teaching of the second coming
of Christ? Is this hope as it appears in the New Testa-
ment merely a piece of Jewish mythological thinking?
Did the early Christians simply derive certain elements
of their world view or Weltanschauung from their re-
ligious environment of Jewish apocalyptic? Must the
modern Christian try to disengage the essential mean-
ing of the redemptive work of Christ from an alien
Jewish eschatological setting? Or is there indeed a pro-
found theology involved in the doctrine of the second
coming of Christ that is essential to the biblical view
of God and history? Furthermore, is there some central
significance in the truth of the second coming of Christ
that should be acceptable to all conservative Christians?
It is the purpose of this brief study to show that the
latter is the case, and that to eliminate the teaching of
the second coming of Christ is to emasculate the bibli-
cal concept of history and redemption.
I I I. The Biblical
Presuppositions
THE MEANING of the second coming of Christ can be
disclosed only in the context of the basic structure of
the theology of the entire Bible. Underlying this doc-
trine are certain biblical presuppositions about the na-
ture of God, man, and the world without which it
cannot be fully understood.
First and most important is the biblical revelation of
God. He is the living God who wills the blessing and
redemption of man. He is the creating God who is the
source of all life and blessing. God discloses His glory
and goodness through His acts in nature. The stars in
the sky, the alternation of the seasons, the return of
seedtime and harvest, the fruitfulness of the earth, all
reflect the faithfulness of God.
Modem man often thinks of "laws of nature" almost
as though they were an unbreakable set of rules, which
govern the forces of nature and to which God himself
must conform. Such thinking is foreign to the Bible.
The regularity of nature does not inhere in nature it-
self but in the God of nature. The "laws of nature" re-
flect merely the orderliness of God's activities in the
world. But since He is indeed the Lord of nature, God
16]
JESUS CHRIST AND HISTORY
can, if He chooses, vary His mode of action. He who
initially created life can destroy life, and He can also
recreate. The question of the "natural" versus the
"supernatural," properly formulated, is not really a
biblical question. It is a human question that often
leaves God out of the picture and assumes that our
observation of the ordinary functioning of nature is
the measure of all reality. It is a man-centered question
rather than a God-centered question; this reverses the
biblical order. He who believes in the God revealed in
the Scriptures, who is the Lord of nature, will recognize
that what we call the "natural" and the "supernaturaY'
in the Bible are nothing other than two different modes
of the divine activity in the world.
The biblical view of nature is a corollary of its view
of God. The world is God's world. We do riot always
realize how often our thinking is colored by the in-
fluence of Greek dualism, which finds a moral difference
inherent in the realms of matter and spirit. Dualism
thinks of the material as the realm of evil, the spiritual
as the realm of good. Such dualistic thinking logically
leads to an eschatology that finds ultimate redemption
in the Hight of man's soul or spirit fromthis fallen world
to a different world, the realm of spiritual existence.
In this view, the world, including bodily existence, is a
necessary but temporary evil, destined ultimately to be
sloughed off. Man will find his true redemption in .an
altogether different order of spiritual, i.e., nonmaterial,
existence.
This again is unbiblical thinking. When God created
the world, He saw that it was good (Genesis 1:31). The
[17
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
goodness   of   nature   has   indeed  been  marred  by  sin.
"The  whole  creation  has   been  groaning in  travail   to-
gether  until now"  (Romans 8:22). This  fact,   however,
must not be interpreted to mean that creation has fallen
from  goodness  to  evil,   so that it   has  become  offensive
to  its  Creator.   The  world  was created  for God's glory
(Psalms 19:1); the ultimate goal and destiny of creation
is to glorify and praise its Creator (Psalms 98:7-9). The
world  is not   a temporary stage  on which man  acts  out
the   drama   of   his   mortal   existence.   Neither   is   it   the
realm  of sin and evil from which man must be rescued.
The  world  was  and is  God's  world  and  therefore  des-
tined   to   play  a   role   in   the   consummation  of   God's
redemptive  purpose.
The   prophet   expresses   it   in   poetical   terms:   "The
mountains  and  hills  before  you  shall   break  forth  into
singing,   and  all   the  trees   of   the   field  shall   clap  their
hands.   Instead of the thorn shall  come  up  the cypress;
instead  of  the  briar  shall   come  up  the  myrtle;   and  it
shall  be  to the Lord for  a memorial,   for  an  everlasting
sign   which   shall   not   be   cut   off'   (Isaiah  55: 12-13).
Paul   employs   more   didactic   language:   "Creation  it-
self will be set  free  from its  bondage of decay and ob-
tain  the  glorious  liberty  of the  children  of  God"   (Ro-
mans   8:21).
The biblical view of man  is a second corollary to the
biblical   doctrine  of  God.   Man  shares   with  nature  the
fact   of   creaturehood.   But   man   stands   apart   from  all
other creatures in  that he  was  created in  the image of
God; therefore he enjoys a relationship to God different
from that of all other creatures. However, this  does not
18]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
mean  that man will   ever  transcend  creaturehood.   In-
deed, the very root  of sin  is unwillingness to  aoknowl-
edge the reality and implications of creaturehood. The
fact   that man is a physical creature in  the world is not
the  measure  of   his   sinfulness   and,   therefore,   a   state
from  which he must he  delivered. In fact,   the  accept-
ance   of   his   creaturehood,   the  confession  of  complete
and  utter   dependence   upon  the   Creator   God,   is  es-
sential to  man's   true existence.   Man  truly knows  him-
seH, recognizes his true self, only when he  realizes that
he is   a  creature.   Then  he  accepts  the  humble  role  of
one  whose  very life is contingent upon God's  faithful-
ness  and  whose  chief   joy  is   to  serve  and  worship  his
Creator. The root of sin is found in the intent of man to
lift   himself   out   of   his   creaturehood,   to   exalt   himself
above  God,   to  refuse  to  give  God  the  worship,   praise,
and  obedience  that   are   His   due.
Salvation, therefore, does not mean deliverance from
creaturehood;   this   creaturehood   is   an   essential   and
permanent element of mans true heing. For this reason,
the   Bible   does   not   picture   ultimate   redemption   in
terms  of  escape  from  earthly,   bodily  existence.   Salva-
tion does not consist of freeing the soul from its engage-
ment in  the material world.   On the contrary,   ultimate
redemption  will   involve  the  redemption  of  the  whole
man,   body,   soul,   and  spirit.   The   resurrection  of   the
body is an integral part of the biblical hope.   Redemp-
tion  cannot   be  limited  to  the  spiritual   realm,   Le.,   to
the  realm  of   the  human  spirit.   Since  man   is  a   unity,
the   whole  man  must   be   redeemed   and  his   body  as
well as his soul delivered from the penalty of fallenness.
[19
IVP   SERIES  I   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
The biblical view of history must also be understood
in its relationship to biblical eschatology.   The Hebrew-
Christian faith is primarily an historical faith.   Christian
theology is  not   primarily  a  set   of  abstract   theological
truths   or   philosophical   absolutes.  It  is  the  systematic
structuring of the inspired meanings that interpret the
redemptive  acts   of  God in  history.
God  called  Israel out   of Egypt.   He  revealed himself
as  the   Lord of  nations  and  of  history  by  His  deliver-
ances of His people within history.   Through God's acts
in  history,   Israel   was   to  learn  that   the  Lord  was  her
God   (Exodus  6:6-7).   Yet  God's  purpose,   even  in  the
Old  Testament,   was   larger  than  Israel.   He   promised
Abraham, "By you  all the families  of the earth will be
blessed"   (Genesis   12: 3).   God   chose   Israel,   not   only
because He  was  concerned to  provide  a way  of salva-
tion for individual men  and for a single nation, but be-
cause He had a purpose for the entire race. The realiza-
tion of this purpose will be the goal of history: the king-
dom of God. God who  chose Israel to be the  people of
His  rule  will   finally  extend this rule   through  and  be-
yond Israel to the whole earth. When God's redemptive
purpose  is  completed,   "the  earth  shall   be  full   of   the
knowledge  of   the  Lord  as   the  waters   cover   the  sea"
(Isaiah  11:9).   The   goal   of   redemption  is  never   pic-
tured  in  terms   of  the  salvation  of  the  individual  soul,
escaping to a remote heaven somewhere far off beyond
the skies. The goal of redemption is historical and  con-
cerns men, not only.as individuals but as a social group.
This   concern  for  history  is a  unique  element  in  the
Hebrew faith in contrast to other Semitic religiOns. The
20]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
pagan gods were  not  gods of history but nature deities,
known in and through the processes of nature and more
or less identified with these processes. The God of Israel
was the  Creator and Lord of nature-but He  was to be
known  primarily  in  and  through  history.   He  was   the
Lord of history:   His people were  to enjoy His blessings
in  nature  but. even  more  in  historical  experience.   Our
modem feeling  for  movement and meaning in  history,
even in  such  a  distorted form  as  that  of dialectic ma-
terialism,  is derived ultimately from the  stimulus  given
to  the   Western  mind  by  the   Hebrew-Christian  tradi-
tion.
In  the   New  Testament,   the  people  of   God   is   the
Church  rather   than   Israel.   However,   Paul   makes   it
clear  in  Romans  11 that  the  promises  of God  to  Israel
have   not   failed,   and  that   Israel   is  yet   to  be brought
back into God's  redemptive purpose.   Even though the
Church, which is the  new  Israel, no longer  has the na-
tional   identity  or  political  character  of  the  old  Israel,
the  concern  for  God's  people  in  history  is not  surren-
dered.   This   is  clearly  disclosed   by  our   Lord's   escha-
tological  prophecy in  Matthew 24. While  the  forecast
of the future  of this  age  to  its  end says nothing about
specific  events  or  personalities  and  contains   no  men-
tion  of  single  nations   or   political   movements,   yet   our
Lord's concern is with history and with the fate  of His
people  in  their   historical   experience.
The purpose of this forecast   of the course of the  age
is not   to  tell how  to calculate  the   time  of  the  end.   In
fact,   Jesus  warns  against   such  calculations  by  saying,
"You will   hear  of  wars   and  rumors   of   wars   .   .   .   but
[21
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
the  end is  not   yet"   (Matthew  24:6).   The  Lord's   dis-
course  prepares   His  disciples  for   their   historical   mis-
sion in the world. This mission is not to build the  king-
dom of God or to transform this age so that it becomes
the   kingdom  of   God.   They  are   indeed  to  preach  the
gospel   of   the   kingdom  in   all   the   world   (Matthew
24:14), and we may say that the kingdom of God works
in  the  world  through  its  emissaries. Yet an  inevitable
hostility  exists between  this  age   and   the   kingdom  of
God,   and   the   disciples   of  the  kingdom  must   be   pre-
pared to  meet   this  hostility.  The kingdom  of God will
not come until the end of the age, when the Son of Man
comes in glory and  power to overthrow evil and  estab-
lish  His  kingdom.
Thus   the  end  of  the   age  and  the   coming  of  Christ
will not  conclude  earthly social existence. The  purpose
of  the  glorious  coming  of  the   Son  of  Man  will be   to
gather His elect from  the  four winds,  from one end of
heaven to the other (Matthew 24:31)   into the kingdom
of God. The kingdom of God remains in the New Testa-
ment   the   goal   of   history.   Therefore   we   pray,   "Thy
kingdom  come,   thy  will   be  done,   on  earth  as  it   is in
heaven." The New Testament as well as the Old is con-
cerned with history and  the  relationship of God's king-
dom  to  history.
A  final   biblical   presupposition   underlying   escha-
tology is the nature of evil. God's kingdom cannot come
until   the  enemies  of  His  kingdom  are  destroyed.   The
final kingdom  of  God  is  the  perfect realization  of  the
rule   of   God,   including  the   full   enjoyment   of   divine
fellowship and  blessings by His creatures. In one sense
22]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
of  the  word,   of course,  God's  rule  is  omnipresent and
eternal.   His  rule   is  intrinsic   to  His   deity.   "The  Lord
has   established   his   throne   in   the   heavens,   and   his
kingdom  rules   over   all"   (Psalms   103:19).   However,
God   in   His   sovereign   mysterious   wisdom  has   per-
mitted His rule to be temporarily limited. He permitted
man to exercise freedom  and rebel against the  Creator.
He  permitted sin to  come into  the  world.   In  creation,
God  had displayed  His  goodness  by  making  man  the
chief   of   all   creatures   and   by   subjecting  the   created
world to  man's care   (Genesis  1:28), entrusting to him
dominion over all other creatures. When. man in proud
seH-assertionrefused to accept the role of creaturehood,
when he succumbed to the temptation to "he like God"
(Genesis  3:5)   and fen  into  sin, God placed the   curse
of death upon man  and  the  burden of decay and evil
upon  the  entire world,   that man might be  oontlnually
reminded of the fundamental fact that sin disrupts the
enjoyment of the blessings of God, even in the  physical
realm.   Life   and   blessing  are   GoOs  gifts;   death,   toil,
and pain are the toll of sin. The final redemption in the
kingdom of God will include salvation from death, pain,
and decay, not only in mans individual experience but
in  the  entire  created  order.
Furthermore, the  Bible reveals something  about evil
which  even  modern  thinkers  outside   of   the  Christian
tradition  are   realizing:   evil   is   greater   than  man  and
greater than all men. Evil does not inhere in the  nature
of material reality.   Evil, in  fact,   is essentially  spiritual
in character. The evils in the  physical creation are  but
a reflection of evil in the spiritual realm. The root of  sin
[23
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
is  not   in  man's   body  but   in  his  rebellious  spirit.   The
ultimate  source   of  evil,   however,   is  not   man  but   the
spiritual world. The Bible represents this by its doctrine
of  Satan.   Satan  or  the  Devil   is  pictured  as  a  spiritual
being  who  has   rebelled  against   God   and  who   exerts
every effort to frustrate God's purposes. Since man, too,
is a spiritual being,   even  though he is also a part of the
material created order,   Satan is particularly concerned
to  frustrate  God's  loving  purposes  for  man.   That man
may  prove himself to  be  a responsible  being,   God  has
permitted Satan to challenge man with the dilemma of
choosing  between  submission  to  the  will   of  God  and
         against   it,   by   forsaking   God   for   the   lying
enticements   of   Satan.   Sin   is   essentially   rebellion
against   God.
  this way, the Bible shows that evil is a power lying
outside of man,   a  power which is  greater than man,   a
power   which  man  can  resist   but   cannot   conquer,   a
power which must be  destroyed before God's kingdom
can  be  perfectly  realized  among  men.
Here are  the foes of God's kingdom:   Satan,   evil, sin,
death. Here are the foes of man's happiness and blessed-
ness. Here are  the forces  which have doomed both in-
dividual experience and human history to a long record
of   violence,   suffering,   decay,   and  futility.
If these  are  the foes of God's kingdom,   two facts  are
clear.   Man  by himself cannot establish the kingdom of
     The   popular   terminology   about   building   the
kmgdom  is   quite   unbiblical.   The   enemies   of   God's
kingdom  are   greater   than  man   and  greater   than  all
men.   God  alone  can  subdue  them.
24]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
It follows  also  that  human  history,   in  and  of  itself,
cannot produce the kingdom of God.   Human history is
a  victim  of   the  evils  that   plague  men.   History  is   the
macrocosm  of   man;   the   awful   tragedies   of   war,   vio-
lence,   oppression,   and  human  exploitation  reveal   the
sinfulness   of  the  human  heart   writ   large  in  historical
terms.   Yet  there  is  something  even  more  fearful   than
man's   sinfulness.   Behind  and  through  human  history
lurks   the  dark  form  of  an  evil   demonic  power,   before
which  even  good  men  feel   helpless.
Here  are  the  presuppositions  of redemptive  history.
God's   kingdom  must mean  the  redemption  of  all   that
man is, his  physical  as well   as his  spiritual being;   for
man's   physical  being  is  not  foreign  to  his  true  being,
but   is  essential   in  that   it   expresses  his   creaturehood.
God's kingdom includes the redemption of the created
order,   for the world was created not to  be  the passing
scene  of  one   act   of   the  human  drama,   but   to  glorify
God.   God's kingdom is the goal  of redemptive  history.
It is concerned with mankind, not only with individual
men.   God must disclose His  lordship both over  nature
and over history,   by  bringing His  kingdom  as the ful-
fillment   and  goal   of  historical  earthly  experience.   Yet
the kingdom of God is now frustrated by powers before
which   man   ultimately   is   helpless.   Man   cannot   rise
above  Satan, sin, and death to establish or to build the
kingdom  of  God.
It  follows,   therefore,   that   only  God  can  bring  His
kingdom.   In the truest sense of the word,   the kingdom
is a reality only if God is God, only if God is the living
God,   only  if  God  is  the  Conqueror  of  Satan,   the  De-
[25
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
stroyer of sin, and the  Victor over death. Only a super-
natural God can  bring His kingdom,   and  only a super-
natural   act   of   the  living  God   can   rout   His   enemies,
giving  men  the  blessings  of  His   reign.
This  is  the  biblical background  for   the  necessity of
the  second   coming   of   Christ.   The  second   coming  of
Christ  means   the   inbreaking  of  the   divine  world  into
the   world  of   human  history.   Although  it   will   occur
within history, there is a real sense in which the  second
coming   of   Christ   may   not   be   called   an   "historical"
event  in  the   technical   use  of   that   word.   "History"  in
the  strict   sense  designates   the   How  of   events,   which
can  be  understood  in  terms   of   an  unbroken  nexus  of
cause  and  effect,   and  interpreted  in  terms   of  analogy
with   other   historical   events.   The   second   coming   of
Christ will not  be  an  event arising  out of history;   nor
will it be the result of other historical events. It will be
a  free  act   of  God,   breaking into  history in  the  person
of the glorified Christ, to redeem history from  the evils
of the centuries and to transform it into the kingdom of
God. It will   be  without real   analogy.   The incarnation
was indeed an  invasion into  history from  God's  world,
and so may seem partly analogous. But  in the  incarna-
tion,   the  coming  of  God  was  veiled.   Only  the   eye  of
faith could behold His glory (John 1:14); even His own
friends thought Jesus was insane  (Mark 3:21). The sec-
ond coming  of  Christ will  be  a  glorious  inbreaking of
the power of God, by which God will do for history and
for  mankind what neither history  nor  man can  do  for
themselves.
26]
IV.   The  Unfolding  Biblical
Perspective
THE RELATIONsmP of eschatology to history can be un-
derstood only in the  light of the nature of prophecy, as
described by Peter:  «And we have this prophetic word
made more  sure.   You will   do  well to  pay  attention to
this as  to  a  lamp  shining  in  a   dark  place"   (II  Peter
1:19).   The  prophetic  word  is  here  likened  to  a  lamp
whose purpose is to guide men through the darkness of
thislife «until the day dawns" at the return of our Lord.
A Palestinian lamp  gave a limited light. It was a  small
clay vessel filled with oil, which provided enough light
to  guide a  traveler through dark streets, showing him
loose stones or pitfalls which might lie in his path. It did
not, however, illuminate the entire village nor turn the
night into day,   as modem street lights  often transform.
our  cities. The primary purpose of such  a lamp  was  to
guide the  traveler along his way  and to  enable him to
avoid  stumbling  or  falling  upon  injury.
We would often like to change the biblical idiom and
think of prophecy as a set  of blueprints for the  future.
We  would like to have every question answered, every
problem solved. However, the prophetic word is a lamp,
not a blueprint, It is given to guide us, not to satisfy our
[27
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
curiosity. It is important to understand that at any given
time in the history of God's redemptive purpose, He has
shed as much light upon the future as was necessary to
guide His people in the present. At one point He would
send  one  ray  of  light,   at   another  time  another  ray  of
light.   For   this  reason  we  find  in  the   New  Testament
much more light upon the future than in the Old Testa-
ment; but we cannot appreciate the necessity and mean-
ing of the  second coming of Christ unless we interpret
the  New Testament teaching against its Old Testament
background.
"Christ"  is  the   Greek  equivalent   of  the   Old  Testa-
ment "Messiah," which means "anointed one." The Old
Testament itself contains no doctrine of a "second com-
ing"  of   Messiah. It   looks forward   usually  to  a  single
great  day  of redemption,   when  God  will intervene in
human history  to  judge evil and  to  establish  His   k i n g ~
dom.  "For  behold,   the  Lord  is coming forth  out  of his
place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the   earth for  their
iniquity"  (Isaiah 26:21). "For behold, the Lord is com-
ing forth out of his place, and will come down and tread
upon the  high places of the  earth"  (Micah 1:3). "I  am
coming to gather all nations and tongues; and they shall
come and shall see my glory"  (Isaiah 66:18). "For be-
hold,   the   Lord  will   come  in  fire  .   .   .   for  by  fire will
the  Lord  execute  judgment"   (Isaiah 66:15,   16). "And
he  will come  to  Zion as  Redeemer,   to  those in Jacob
who  tum  from  transgression,   says  the   Lord"   (Isaiah
59:20). "Behold,. the Lord God comes with might,   and
his arm rules for him; behold,  his reward is with  him,
and  his recompense  before him. He  will feed his flock
28]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
like a shepherd, he will gather the  lambs in his  arms"
(Isaiah   40:10-11).   "Then   the   Lord   your   God   will
come,   and   all   the   holy   ones   with   him"   (Zechariah
14:5).
None of these  verses in their  Old  Testament  setting
refer to the  Messiah. They describe  a final visitation of
God  to  judge  the  world  and  save  His  people. It  is   a
judgment in history,   on the  earth.   The  same God who
created the  earth,   who visited  Israel in  Egypt to  save
them  from  bondage  and   oppression,   will   finally  visit
the   earth  for   both  judgment and  salvation.   All these
verses speak of a coming of God rather than the  Mes-
siah.
This   visitation  is  sometimes  called   the   day  of   the
Lord.   The  Lord's  day will   be  the  day  when  the  Lord
breaks   down   everything   that   lifts   itself   up   against
Him,   so that  "the  Lord  alone  will   be  exalted  in  that
day"   (Isaiah 2:12, 17). The  day  of the Lord  will be a
day  of   wrath  and  judgment   against   everything  evil,
both among men and in the physical world  (Zephaniah
1:7,   14, 18; 2:3).
Out   of  judgment will emerge  the  kingdom  of  God.
"In  that   day"   Israel   will be  restored  from  bondage
(Amos 9:11). "In that day" God's dispersed people will
be  regathered,   and  the  Lord  will reign  over them for-
ever   (Micah  4:7).   "In  that   day"   all   weapons  of  war
and  all instruments of evil will be swept  away  (Micah
5: 10ff.), "In that day" the curse will be lifted. The earth
will become  fruitful,   the  deaf  will hear,   the  blind  will
see,   and   the  poor   will   rejoice   in   the   Lord   (Isaiah
29:18-19).
[29
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
When God visits His people to redeem them, He will
raise up a messianic King to rule over them and to exe-
cute justice  and  righteousness   (Isaiah 11:4). Violence
and  evil will be purged from the  earth, and  "the earth
shall  be full   of the  knowledge  of the  Lord  as the  wa-
ters  cover the sea"  (vss. 6-9). All this will happen be-
cause "In that day the root of Jesse [the messianic King]
shall   stand  as  an  ensign  to  the  peoples;   him  shall  the
nations   seek,  and  his  dwelling  shall   be  glorious"  (vs.
10). In this future kingdom, God's people will be gath-
ered  in  righteousness   and   blessing.   God  will   make   a
new covenant with them, when He will give them a new
heart and a new spirit, that they may be perfectly obe-
dient to their God  (JereIniah 31:33-34; Ezekiel 36:25-
27).  He will forgive their sins and  will pour His Spirit
upon all His people  (Joel 2:28 ). He will open a fountain
to cleanse them from all uncleanness  (Zechariah 13:1).
Godwill be their God and they will be His people (Jere-
miah 31:33), and  God will dwell in their midst   (Zech-
ariah  2:10-11).
In  addition  to  the  expectation  of  a  messianic  King,
two other messianic portraits appear in the Old Testa-
ment which  are  not   integrated with  the  prophecies  of
the messianic King. In Isaiah 53, the Servant of the Lord
pursues   a  path  of meekness  and  suffering, and  finally
pours out His soul in death to bear the sin of the people
and  to make atonement for the  transgressors. This  suf-
fering  Servant   is not,   in  the  Old  Testament,  identified
with   the   messianic. King;   and   Jewish  theology  could
never   quite  decide what  to do  with  this  prophecy.
There is an entirely different portrait in Daniel 7. In
30]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
this vision "one like a son of man" comes to the  Ancient
of Days,  and  to Him is given the kingdom of God that
all   the  peoples,   nations,   and  languages   should   serve
Him  in  an  everlasting dominion  and  rule  which  shall
never pass away  (Daniel 7:13-14). He  is an individual
who represents and is identified with the people of God
(vs.   18).   However,   this   heavenly  Son of Man  is  not
identified with the  messianic King; and  neither Son of
Man  nor   Messiah  is  identified  with  the   suffering  Ser-
vant.   The relationship of these  several prophecies was
never  understood  until   our  Lord  came  to  fulfill them.
This  is why  we  cannot understand the Old  Testament
apart from its New Testament fulfillment. Fromthe Old
Testament alone, one would think that these were three
different   personages,   each  with  a  separate  mission.
The  Old  Testament   neither   shows  the   relationship
existing  among. these   three  messianic  personages   nor
outlines a program of events  by  which God's kingdom
is to be established. Yet several important features char-
acterize  the   kingdom  of  God,   and  these  must   not be
overlooked.
The  kingdom  is  a  kingdom  in  history.   It   primarily
concerns,   not   the  salvation  of the  individual soul, but
the  salvation of God's people. It will mean the  consum-
mation of God's redemptive working with Israel in his-
tory.   The  God  who  saved  Israel from  the  bondage  of
Egypt will finally save His people  from bondage to  all
sin  and  evil.
The kingdom is akingdom produced, not by history,
but by God.   But the  Old Testament does not conceive
of all history as a manifestation of God's power working
[31
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
redemptively in all historical processes. On the contrary,
there is an evil element, a demonic force at work in his-
tory  which causes men and  nations  to exalt themselves
against God  and  oppose  His  holy  will. Therefore God
became   uniquely   active   in   one   stream  of   history-
in the experience of Israel-to change the course of his-
tory and to bring to pass His purposes for all.men, Israel
escaped  from  Egypt,   not   because  she  successfully  re-
volted  against the  Egyptians or because of Moses' wis-
dom and cunning.   God acted and  delivered Israel from
Egypt. The  final deliverance from  evil in the kingdom
of  God  will be  caused only  by  a final  and  mighty  act
of   God,   when  all   evil   is  destroyed  and  God's  people
saved.
The  kingdom  of God  will be  both spiritual and  ma-
terial.   There is no  purely "spiritual" salvation.   Sin has
cursed  man  in  his relationship to  God,   in his  relation-
ship  to  his  fellowmen,   in  his  relationship  to  himself,
and  even  in  his   relationship  to  his   physical   environ-
ment.   Therefore   salvation   must   involve   deliverance
from all evil. Only  a mighty  visitation of God  in  judg-
ment,   only  a  new  creative  act   of  God  who  is Lord  of
both nature and  history,   can  avail  to  rescue  men  from
all   that   evil   signifies.  This   divine   act   of   salvation   is
viewed in the  Old Testament as a single great redemp-
tive event, which will take place on the day of the Lord.
The  New Testament further  unfolds  God's  redemp-
tive purpose,   revealing its fulfillment as far  more com-
plex than the  Old Testament prophecies suggest. How-
ever, a redemption'that is both spiritual and material in
the Old Testament does not become exclusivelyspiritual
32]
JESUS   CHRIST   AND  HISTORY
in the  New. Redemption of the  physical order remains
a  continuing feature  in  the  New  Testament   (Romans
8:21).   But   the   redemptive  event,   which  was  viewed
as one dayin the Old Testament, in the New Testament
is seen as two days. The single redemptive act expected
at the day of the Lord has now become two acts. These
two  acts  are  the incarnation of  Christ  and  His  second
coming.
This does not imply that God has changed His plans,
or that the Old Testament is in error. It merely indicates
that in the  movement of redemptive history,   God pro-
gressively revealed the  steps by  which He will  accom-
plish His  purposes for  man's  redemption. There are  in
the New Testament, as it were, two days of redemption.
The  coming  of Christ in  history  ushered  in  the  fulfill-
ment of the Old Testament promise of salvation; yet the
second coming of Christ must occur to bring this salva-
tion  to  its   consummation.
This is why the  New Testament redemption involves
a  strange  tension  between  present  fulfillment   and  fu-
ture consummation. In the synagogue at Nazareth our
Lord   read  a   passage   from  Isaiah  which  foretold  the
"year of the  Lord's favor,"   Le., the coming of the king-
dom of God; and then he announced, "Today this scrip-
ture  has  been fulfilled  in  your   hearing"   (Luke  4:21).
Yet   the   prophecy  in   Isaiah   announced  "the   day   of
vengeance of our God" (Isaiah 61:2), but Jesus did not
include these words in His proclamation of fulfillment.
The day  of the Lord's  favor has  come, but the  day  of
God's  vengeance  stands  yet  in  the  future.
This tension  between fulfillment   and consummation
[33
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
is  the  reason  the   New  Testament  speaks  of  the   great
redemptive realities as something both present and fu-
ture. Thus Paul can say, "Behold, now is the acceptable
time;   behold,   now  is  the  day  of salvation"  (II  Corin-
thians  6:2);   yet   Peter speaks  of "a  salvation  ready  to
be  revealed  in  the  last   time"   (I  Peter  1:5).   Thus   we
are told  that the  kingdom of God has come  (Matthew
12:28; Luke  17:21); yet we pray for its coming  (Mat-
thew 6:10). Thus we have eternal life as a present pos-
session (John 3:36; 10:10); yet we shall receive eternal
life  in  the  future   (John  12:25;  Matthew  25:46).
The  gospel proclaimed  in the  New Testament is the
good news  that "the  Lord  God  of Israel..   .   has  vis-
ited  and  redeemed his  people"   (Luke  1:68). It is the
proclamation  of what God has done in history in Jesus
Christ. Yet everywhere in the New Testament the day of
the Lord remains, as in the Old Testament, a future  day
of  eschatological consummation  (I  Thessalonians 5:2;
I  Corinthians  1:8; II Thessalonians 2:2).
We may change  the  metaphor by  saying that in the
Old  Testament   the   drama   of  salvation  occurs  in  one
great act,   while  in  the  New Testament it   has  become
two acts. But it  is the  same play. This  means  that the
second  coming  of  Christ does  not   stand  in  the   future
by itself,   but  is rather inseparable from His  past work
in  history.   Incarnation,   second  coming:   these  are  the
two  steps  in  the  accomplishment   of  the  messianic re-
demption.   Together   they  constitute  a  single  event.
This  fact   can  be  illustrated in  two  ways, by  a  con-
sideration of Jesus' messianic office and a consideration
of  His  messianic  work.
34]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
The NewTestament shows us that the three messianic
portraits in the Old Testament-those of suffering Ser-
vant, messianic King, and Son of Man-depict different
aspects  of  the  one  messianic personage.   This  is  made
clear by our Lord's use of the  term  Son of Man, which
is   quite   different   from  the   Old  Testament  use.
In  Daniel,  the Son of Man is associated with  a dra-
matic "apocalyptic" inbreaking of God's kingdom. This
coming of  God's  kingdom  is  first  described  in  Daniel
in Nebuchadnezzar's dream of a great image that repre-
sented the  several successive empires of world history.
Nebuchadnezzar   saw  a  stone,   cut   out   by  no  human
hand,   smite the  image  on its feet,   breaking  the  image
and  grinding  it   to  powder   so  that   the  wind  swept it
away. Then the stone which smote the image grew until
it became a mountain and filled the whole earth  (Dan-
iel 2:31-35). The message of this  dream  was  that the
kingdom  of God would  not   arise gradually  within his-
tory by a slowprocess of growth or evolution, but would
come suddenly, catastrophically by a mighty act of God
to  accomplish both judgment and salvation. The  king-
dom of God would come in history, but it would come
from  outside  of  history.
In the  parallel   vision in the  seventh chapter we  are
told that this kingdom will be given to the Son of Man,
who will come with the clouds of heaven and will then
rule  in  His kingdom  over all nations  on the  earth  for-
ever   (Daniel  7:13-14).
Jesus taught  that He was  the  Son of  Man  who  one
day will come with the clouds and with power and great
glory, as Daniel described, to establish the kingdom of
[35
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
God  (Matthew  16:27; 24:27; 25:31; 13:41).   But first,
before  He appears in power and glory, the  Son of Man
hasappeared humbly on earth to fulfill a mission of suf-
fering  and  death.   The  Son of Man has a twofold mis-
sion:   present   suffering and  future   glory.
Even in His humility, He is the  Son of Man. As this
Son of Man from heaven, He has authority  on earth to
forgive sins  (Mark  2:10).   He  is  Lord  of the  sabbath
and   has   authority   to  reinterpret   the   Law  of   Moses
(Mark 2:28). He is indeed the channel of communica-
tion between  heaven and  earth  (John  1:51). Yet even
though  He  is the  heavenly Son of  Man, He  is among
men  in  weakness, without   a  home   (Matthew  8:20),
destined to be surrendered into the hands of men (Mat-
thew  17:22),   to  be  tortured  and  finally put   to  death
(Matthew 20:18-19). This, however, was no historical
accident; it was the mission of the Son of Man to come
to  give His life a ransom for many  (Matthew 20:28).
Suffering and  death  were  to  be  His  present   mission,
glory and  exaltation as the Judge of the  world His fu-
ture destiny. As the Son of Man on earth, He must first
       the role of the suffering Servant. A second phase
of     redemptive missionis His future comingin glory.
This twofold missionof sufferingand of glory are not
  unrelated  acts;   rather,   they  are  two  phases  of  a
sIngle redemptive work. This is shown by such sayings
as Mark 8:38:   "For whoever is ashamed of me and  of
  words in  this  adulterous  and  sinful generation, of
him will the  Son. of  Man  also be  ashamed,   when  he
comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels."
36]
JESUS   CHRIST   AND   HISTORY
The  response of men  to  the  humble,   suffering Son of
Man will determine their judgment by the glorious Son
of Man. He is the same Son of Man in suffering and in
glory. As men  confess Him  in  His  atoning  sufferings,
He  will confess them  in  His  glory.
Thus  it   becomes clear  that   before  the  Son of  Man
comes in  glory to  judge the  world, to purge  the  earth
of all evil, and to gather the righteous into the kingdom
of God (Matthew 13:37-43), He has a prior missionto
fulfill: that of sufferingand death. The sufferingServant
of Isaiah 53 is indeed the Son of Man of Daniel 7; but
His  mission of suffering and  death must  precede  and
provide the  basis for His mission as the  heavenly  Son
of  Man.
This twofold  drama  of  salvation  is  illustrated,   not
only  by  Jesus'   messianic  office  but   also by  His  mes-
sianic work. We have seen that the Old Testament looks
forward  to  a  single great  day  of the  Lord, when  God
will intervene  in  history to  destroy evil and  to  gather
His people into the kingdomof God. The further revela-
tion  in  the   New  Testament   shows us  something  that
Goddid not disclosein the Old Testament:  the triumph
of   God's  kingdom  over   evil   occurs  in  two  acts,   not
one.
The  New  Testament   teaches   that   the  two  greatest
enemies of  God's  kingdom  are  death  and  Satan.   The
purpose  of Jesus'  total   redemptive  mission is summed
up  concisely in  I   Corinthians 15:25-26:   "For  he  must
reign  until  he  has  put   all his  enemies under   his  feet.
The last enemy to be destroyed  is death."  Here  is the
[37
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
final   goal   of  Jesus'   redemptive  work:   to  deliver   "the
kingdom to God the  Father after destroying  every rule
and  every  authority  and  power"   (vs,   24).
This   conquest   of  God's  kingdom  occurs  in  at   least
two acts. The death of Jesus of Nazareth was not merely
the  death of a man.   He  was the  heavenly  Son of  Man
on  earth  who  came  to  grapple  with  death  and  to  de-
stroy  it.   Dying  was  His   very  mission  (Mark  10:45).
Through  His   death  and   resurrection,   He   "abolished
death and brought life and immortality to light through
the gosper'  (II Timothy 1:10).
Here  is  an   amazing   statement.   Death  has   already
been abolishedI Obviously, this verse requires  explana-
tion. The Greek word translated "abolished" is the same
word translated "destroy" in 1 Corinthians 15:26. It can
mean "to  destroy."  but it can  also mean «to break the
power.   to  make  ineffective." The  destruction  of death
occurs in two acts. By His death and resurrection Christ
has already attacked the enemy. death. He has already
broken  its power.   He  has  already brought to  men  the
blessing  of   the   eternal   life  of   the   future  kingdom  of
God.
This is why  Paul describes  the  resurrection  of Jesus
Christ as the  beginning of the  final resurrection  (I Co-
rinthians   15:23).   The   resurrection  of   Jesus   was   not
the reanimation of a dead body to physical life. Lazarus
had  been   restored  from  death  to  physical   life   (John
11:44).   but   Lazarus   never   dreamed  of  saying.   "1 am
the  resurrection  and the life;  because  I  live. you  shall
live also:' Lazarus  was a mortal  man who was restored
to  mortal  life.
38]
JESUS   CHRIST   AND  HISTORY
Not so with Jesus'  resurrectionI His resurrection de-
notes  something  new.   something never   before  experi-
enced. It demonstrated the  emergence of a new  order
of life. resurrection life. the life of the kingdom of God.
It  may  be  crudely  described  in  these  words:   a  piece
of the resurrection of the last day. which will introduce
the  eschatological   kingdom of  God.   has  been split   off
and  implanted in the  midst   of human history.   The es-
chatological   resurrection has already begun.   Therefore
the   Christian  hope   of  resurrection  and  immortality  is
far more than a hope; it is a certainty based on the fact
that the  first stage  of the resurrection has  already  oc-
curred.  We merely await the second stage of the event.
This is the meaning of eternal life. It is the life of the
future eschatological kingdom of God  (Matthew 19:16.
23).  Yet this life is already ours  through the  resurrec-
tion of Christ.   He  brought into  human history  the  life
and immortality of the kingdom of God. We may there-
fore even  now experience His resurrection life  (Ephe-
sians 2:5; Romans 6:4). This is why the Gospel of John
says  so  much  about   eternal   life  as   a   present   reality
(John 3:36;   10:10). The life of the  resurrection  (John
5:29)   has   become  present experience   (5:25)   because
the  Bearer of eternal life  (5:26)  and the  Conqueror of
death  (11:25-26)   has   come  among  men.
Nevertheless. we die. Although we have  eternal life.
we go to the grave. The mortician who prepares a corpse
for   burial   is  unconcerned  whether   the   deceased  was
Christian or non-Christian. In either case. the  body is
dead.
The present victory of Christ over death is a real vic-
[39
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
tory,   but   it   is  only  a  partial   victory.   Death  must   be
finally  destroyed  so  that   God's   people  no  longer   die.
Mortality must be swallowed up by life (II Corinthians
5:4).   This  final  victory  will   occur   only  at  the   end  of
Christ's reign. Man cannot conquer death; medical and
biological science cannot conquer death.   Only  the  Son
of God,   who  has  already conquered death,   can  finally
destroy it. Therefore Christ must come again to consum-
mate the victory He has already won. At the end, death
and  the   grave  are   to  be  thrown  into  the   lake  of  fire
(Revelation 20:14).   Apart from  the  second  coming  of
Christ,   God's   victory   over   death  remains   incomplete.
The  conquest   is   unfinished,   the   triumph  only  provi-
sional. But  His coming is assured, because He will cer-
tainly   finish  what   He   has   begun.   He   came   once   to
break the power of death; He will come again to destroy
death  forever.
A second enemy to be destroyed is evil and  the  spir-
itual source of evil-Satan.  The  Gospels  tell  us  that at
the  heart of our Lord's  earthly ministry was a struggle
with  satanic  evil.   Satan  assaulted Jesus  in  the  wilder-
ness   and   tried   to   turn   Him  aside   from  His   God-
appointed mission. Satan tried to entice Jesus to take  a
short-cut to His destiny as glorious Son of Man by avoid-
ing  the cross. He  urged Jesus to compel recognition of
His  glory by  spectacular miracles.   He  promised  to  in-
stall   Jesus  as  Lord  of  the   world if  Jesus  would  heed
him  (Matthew  4:5-10).
Jesus in turn described His own mission as an assault
against the  kingdom of Satan.  One of His most charac-
teristic and repeated miracles was  the  exorcism of de-
40]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
mons. Everywhere He went, Jesus delivered men  from
this  satanic bondage.   Mark  sounds  this  note as  one  of
the  most   significant   aspects  of  His  ministry.   The  peo-
ple said, 'What is this? A new teachingl With authority
he  commands  even  the unclean spirits,   and they obey
him"   (Mark  1:27).
When the Pharisees accused Him  of being in league
with Satan himseH, Jesus  replied that  the  charge  was
ridiculous,   for it would  entail civil war within  Satan's
household,   and   the   falI  of   his  kingdom   (Matthew
12:25-26).   Then  Jesus  spoke  these  significant   words:
"Or how can one enter a strong man's house and plun-
der his goods,   unless   he   first   binds  the  strong  man?
Then  indeed  he  may  plunder   his  house"   (Matthew
12:29).
Satan  is  the  strong man.   His  "goods"  are  men and
women-human   personalities-in   bondage   to   satanic
powers, to evil. While demon possession is the most ex-
treme  manifestation  of   satanic  power,   it   is   exercised
only  over   a  few  men.   Paul   tells   us  that   the  heart   of
satanic  evil   is  bondage  to  darkness,   blindness   to  the
glory of  God  (II  Corinthians  4:4).   Jesus'  mission was
to deliver men from the dominion of darkness and trans-
fer   them  to  the  rule  of God (Colossians   1:13).   How-
ever, first He must defeat the strong man. Jesus cannot
enter Satan's  house  and  plunder his goods, delivering
men from  bondage to darkness,   except He "first binds
th   " e  strong  man.
Jesus has  already attacked Satan's kingdom.   He has
assaulted his house. He has already "bound" the strong
man.   Because  this victory  over   satanic  evil   has   been
[41
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
won, we may now experience deliverance from darkness
in  the   freedom  of  Christ's   kingdom.
Hebrews  expresses  this  same  truth in  different   lan-
guage. Since those whom Christ would redeem are flesh
and  blood,   He,   the  heavenly  Son  of   Man,   took  upon
Him  the  same  human form  and nature,  "that through
death  he   might   destroy  him  who   has the   power   of
death,   that   is,   the   devil,   and   deliver   all ·those   who
through fear of death were subject to lifelong bondage"
(Hebrews 2:14-15). The death of Jesus, as well as His
life and  miracles, was an attack on Satan.  Through His
death,   Jesus  has   assaulted  and  "destroyed"  him  who
has the power of death. This word "destroy" is the same
word we  have  already met   in I  Corinthians 15:24 and
II Timothy 1:10. It means "to break the power." Christ,
both by  His life and death, has  broken Satan's  power,
has "bound" him. God's kingdom  has assaulted Satan's
kingdom  and  won  a  great   victory.   Satan  is  now,   be-
cause  of  the  incarnation,   a  defeated  foe.
Yet evil   remains   in  the   world.   To  be  sure,   there  is
far   more  righteousness  in  human  history  than  before
Christ   came.   The  gospel   of  Jesus'   incarnation,   death,
and resurrection does far  more  than promise  a blessed
future to the  individual soul. The  gospel changes  lives.
It revolutionizes human personalities.  It transforms hu-
man conduct. It rebuilds homes and communities,   and
sometimes even nations. No Christian missionary is con-
tent to preach a spiritual salvation to  primitive  people
while   leaving   their   bodies   and  minds   in  bondage  to
filth,   disease,   superstition,   and   ignorance.   Wherever
it   goes, the   gospel  has  power  to  transform  all life  to-
42]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
ward  righteousness,   delivering  men  from  bondage  to
evil   of  all   kinds.
Yet the world continues to be an evil place. The king-
dom  of  God  has   come  into  history  and  is at  work  in
history.   Nevertheless, history has not become the king-
dom  of  God.   Today many  of  our   best  minds  who  do
not   accept the  distinctly  Christian  teaching recognize
a  demonic   element  in  human  history.   Evil   is   greater
than man and greater than all men;  and our generation
is  fearful   that   evil   may  destroy  it.
The second coming of Christ is necessary to complete
the conquest of evil. This man cannot do; only God can
conquer  and destroy  Satan.   We  may  picture  the   c o ~ ­
quest of evil as a warfare with two great battles. In His
incarnation,   Christ  attacked  Satan  and  won  a  mighty
victory.   He  saw  Satan fall  from  his  place of power in
heaven (Luke 10:18). The warfare has been launched;
the first   and  crucial battle  has  been fought   and  won.
D-day  has   taken  place;   but  V-day  awaits   the  second
coming  of  Christ,"  Then and  then only will  evil be  fi-
nally  destroyed.
The Scripture pictures this final destruction of Satan
in vivid  terms.   There is a lake of fire prepared for  the
devil and his  angels   (Matthew 25:41).   At   the  end  of
Christ's reign,   every  enemy will be  destroyed, and the
devil   will   be   cast   into   the   lake   of   fire   (Revelation
20:10).   His final doom  is sure,   for he  is already a  de-
feated  enemy.
In  summary,   the   Scriptures   teach  that   the   second
aOscar  Cullmann in  his excellent book Chrilt and Time bas popu-
larized  this  idea.
[43
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
coming  of Christ is the  means  by  which  God will   ac-
complish the  destruction of His enemies and. the gath-
ering of His people into the blessings of the kmgd?m of
God. The kingdom of God implies that the  salvation of
the  individual is never viewed in detachment from the
salvation of the  people  of God. The kingdom of God is
therefore  the  final   goal  of  human  history.
The  seeming  difference in the  prophetic expectation
in the  Old and New Testaments is inherent in progres-
sive revelation.   The  Old  Testament hope  is  expressed
primarily in terms  of the  nation Israel as the people of
God, while the  New Testament further defines the  pe0-
ple of God in terms of the Church. This New Testament
redefinition   does   not,   however,   exclude   Israel.   Israel
is yet to  be  saved  and  included in  the  people of God.
While there is a difference in emphasis, the underly-
ing  theology  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament hope  is
the same. In fact, the New Testament hope  can be un-
derstood only in  light   of the  Old Testament.   The  Old
Testament looks forward to one  great day  of the Lord
when evil will be destroyed and God's people gathered
into  His kingdom.   The  New  Testament shows us  that
this goal   of  God's  kingdom  is  to  be  achieved  in  two
great redemptive  acts.   By His              life,         
and resurrection, Christ has entered Into human history
to attack the enemies of man and God. He has defeated
the  power of satanic evil, He has broken the      
of   death,   He   is   gathering  together   a   people   m  His
Church who have been delivered from bondage to dark-
ness and fear of death, who have experienced the power
of  His  resurrection  and  shared His  life.   Yet   evil   and
4A]
JESUS   CHRIST   AND  HISTORY
death  continue;   and  although  redeemed,   even  God's
people  still  sin  and  die.   We  await the   second  coming
of our victorious Lord to complete  the  conquest of our
enemies and to bring us into the fullness of redemption.
He  who has  already attacked  and defeated  Satan  will
come again to destroy him. He who came once to con-
quer   death  will   come  again  to  destroy  it.   When  He
comes again,   He will gather His redeemed people  into
the   kingdom  of  God,   where  they  will be  forever   de-
livered  from evil, sin, and  death and will enjoy all that
constitutes  eternal  life  in  fellowship  with  God.
v.   The Second Coming and the
Present  Lordship of Christ
PETER  COMFORTS  believers   experiencing  fiery  ordeals
with the  hope  "that you may  also rejoice and be  glad
when  his  glory  is revealed"  (I  Peter 4:13).   Paul   also
promises to suffering Christians the hope of rest "when
the   Lord  Jesus  is  revealed  from  heaven"  (II  Thessa-
lonians  1:7).   The second  coming  of  Christ will  mean
the revelation,   the  disclosure to the  world, of the glory
which already belongs  to Him who is now the  Lord in
heaven.
The fact that the second coming of Christ will be the
[45
[47
IVP SERIES / CONTEMPORARY CHRISTIAN THOUGHT
disclosure of His present lordship serves as a corrective
to two unbiblical views of the kingdom of God. It cor-
rects the view that God's kingdom can come apart from
the second coming of Christ; it corrects the view that
the kingdom of God belongs altogether to the future,
without being at the same time one dimension of His
present work. The coming of His kingdom will be the
manifestation in the world of a reign which Christ en-
tered at His resurrection and ascension. From one point
of view, the return of Christ will import nothing new.
It will disclose to the world the glory which He now
possesses, manifest the lordship which He now enjoys,
extend among men a reign He is now exercising.
The fact is that Jesus is now Lord. He is now en-
throned at God's right hand as the messianic King. His
second coming will display this lordship, acknowledged
today only by believers, to all the world.
We have shown in the previous chapter that the king-
dom of God means the effective, redemptive rule of
Christ over His enemies. This conquest over His ene-
Inies-sin, death, and Satan-does not belong to the
future only. By His life, death, and resurrection, Christ
attacked and defeated Satan. He has already broken
the power of death.
Now we are ready to consider a further fact: the as-
cension of Christ and His session or enthronement at
the right hand of God is a further step in His conquest
of evil. However, the victory which He won in His res-
urrection and ascension is now unseen by the world. As
human history moves on, it sometimes seems as though
Satan were the «god of this age" (II Corinthians 4:4)
46]
JESUS CHRIST AND HISTORY
in an almost unqualified sense of the word.         
this is not true. It is only the appearance of things.
Back of the ebb and How of history lies the fact that
evil has been defeated, Jesus has been enthroned a.s
Lord, and God is only waiting for His own hour until
Christs lordship is revealed, evil is trampled beneath
His feet and His rule extended over the whole world.
In the temptation, Satan tried to turn Jesus away
from the cross by proInising Him rule over. the     
without suffering (Matthew 4:8-9). Yielding to this
temptation would have meant the victory of the rule of
Satan over the kingdom of God. Jesus faithfully and
unswervingly pursued the mission of obedience and
humility for which He had come. Although as the   
f God He had existed with His Father in heaven m
  form of God, He had not seized upon equality with
His Father, but had emptied himself in humiliation by
taking the form of a slave and being born as a man
among men. As a man, He humbled himself yet further
and became obedient even to death on the cross. How-
ever because of His obedience and faithfulness unto
death God the Father has highly exalted Him. God
has     Him from the dead, exalted Him to God's
own right hand, and bestowed upon Himthe name that
is above every name: Lord (PhilippianS 2:6-11).
Jesus is now the Lord. This was the heart of the early
Christian confession: not Jesus as Savior, as is so often
true today, but Jesus as Lord. It is confession of Jesus
as Lord which saves (Romans 10:9). This wasthe sub-
stance of the early Christian gospel: Jesus Christ is
Lord (II Corinthians 4:5).
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
This confession meant more than a personal relation-
ship  of total  obedience  to  Christ,   although  obedience
was   included.  It   was  first   of   all   the   confession  of   a
theological fact. It meant the recognition that Christ ac-
tually  is the  Lord,   enthroned in heaven.   Because Jesus
is  the   heavenly  Lord,   the  individual  believer  submits
to  His  lordship.
This  was  Peter's  message  on  the   day  of  Pentecost.
The first Christian sermon proclaimed the fact of Jesus'
lordship  and  appealed to  men  to  accept it. Jesus, who
had  been  crucified,   could  not   possibly  be  left   in  the
grave,   for  David had  prophesied that God  "would  set
one of his  descendants  upon  his  throne"  (Acts  2:30).
Peter finds proof  of this  in  Psalms 110:1:   .. 'The Lord
said  to my  Lord,   Sit at my right hand, till I  make thy
enemies   a  stool   for   thy  feet'"   (Acts   2:34,   35).   This
Peter interpreted with the affirmation, "Let all the house
of Israel therefore know  assuredly  that God  has  made
him both Lord and  Christ (Messiah), this Jesus whom
you  crucified"   (vs.   36).
Lord  and  messianic  King! This  is  Jesus'   office even
today.   All authority has been given  to Him  in heaven
and on earth (Matthew 28:18). He has been enthroned
at God's  right  hand  (Hebrews  1:3;   8:1;   10:12;  12:2).
This  fact   Signifies  nothing less than that  Jesus  in  His
triumph and exaltation shares the very  throne of God
himself  (Revelation 3:21). He is now reigning as King
(I Corinthians 15:25); and He will continue His kingly
reign until all His enemies have been made the footstool
of His feet-until Satan and death are finally destroyed
Now  we   can   understand  more   precisely  what   the
48]
JESUS   CHRIST   AND  HISTORY
second  coming  of Christ represents:   the manifestation
and the  extension of His present reign  over the  world.
The world does not know that He is now enthroned as
Lord  and  King.   Every knee   does  not   bow  and  every
tongue  does  not  confess that  He  is Lord  (Philippians
2:10-11).   His  lordship  is  indeed  being proclaimed  in
all the world, but only those who accept the gospel con-
fess His lordship and  bow before His kingly rule.   This
is why the second coming at Christ is absolutely neces-
sary. His return will be the means of bringing the strug-
gle  with  evil   to  an  end.   The   final   victory  is  assured,
because  the  initial victory  has  already been won,   and
He  is already the  victorious, regnant Lord  and  Christ.
This triumphant second  coming  of  Christ is vividly
pictured in the Revelation in terms of a conquering war-
rior  (Revelation 19:11-16). The Kin,g of kings and Lord
of  lords,   who  is also the  Word  of  God, is pictured as
coming on a white battle charger.   He  is crowned with
the  insignia  of   royal   power;   His   clothing  is  splashed
with blood from  the  battle. He  is accompanied by  the
armies   of   heaven,   who   are   similarly   garbed   and
mounted.   However,   the   only  weapon  of  conflict  is  a
sword-a  sharp  sword  issuing  from  the  mouth  of   the
returning King-the sword  of His mouth,   the  Word  of
God.
What an incomprehensible conception! Who can take
this   picture  literally!  Who  can  conceive  of   a  warrior
with a sword swinging back and forth out of his mouth,
chopping  down  his  foesl Yet what  a  majestic  concep-
tion! In the beginning, God spoke, and the  world came
into being  (Genesis 1:9; John 1:1, 3; Hebrews 11:3). In
[49
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
the incarnation, God spoke, and redemption was accom-
plished   (John   1:1-14;   Hebrews   1:1-3).   At   the   end,
Christ will speak, and evil will be destroyed. However
we  are  to  understand  the  details,   one  central   fact   is
sure. Christ will come; His kingdom will yet rule over
all; every knee will bow and  every tongue confess His
lordship.
VI.   The Second Coming and
History
IN THE  FIRST  CHAPTER,   we outlined several modem  re-
interpretations of history and eschatology which make
little room for the second coming of Christ. One might
ask, «If the  teaching  of the  second coming is so very
important in  biblical thought,   why  do not  all modem
biblical interpreters  accept   it?"
The difficulty with  this doctrine does not rest in the
obscurity of the biblical teaching. It grows out of mod-
em ideas about history. As we saw in the first chapter,
the  modem  concept  that history has destiny  and  pur-
pose reflects the  impact  of the  Old Testament  idea  of
history moving to a divinely appointed  goal. However,
many of the modem  interpretations have forsaken the
biblical perspective at an all-important point. The Bible
50]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTOBY
is   God-centered,   while   our   modem  views   are   man-
centered.   History is no longer understood in a biblical
sense but in a modernized sense. History is defined in
terms of contemporary philosophies rather than in terms
of  God,   the  Lord  of nature  and  history.
It is often said that if history really has a  goal, this
goal must be achieved within history and by historical
forces. If  history itself does not   produce  the  kingdom
of God, the kingdom is not really historical. Therefore
we must seek to discover forces of progress and devel-
opment  within  history. The idea  of a heavenly Son of
Man  coming with  glory from  heaven  does  not   mean
the redemption of history. It means rather the destruc-
tion of history. Such concepts, we are told, are utterly
foreign  to  historical  experience. Rudolf  Bultmann  ex-
presses it: «It is no longer possible for anyone seriously
to hold the New Testament view of the world ...  We
can no longer look for the return of the Son of Man on
the clouds of heaven or hope that the faithful will meet
him in the  air."  Therefore the  New Testament notions
about a heavenly Sonof Man coming in glory cannot be
an  essential part  of the  gospel, but only the  religiOUS
framework taken over by the early Christians from their
environment   of Jewish apocalyptic  thought.
This is why  Bultmann reinterprets eschatology alto-
gether in terms of personal existence and confessescom-
plete ignorance as to the goal of history. Such thinking,
however, soradically reinterprets the gospel as to empty
it   of its  fundamental   character.   For   the  gospel is not
concerned alone with personal existence and individual
salvation, although  it   includes  these.   The  gospel   COD-
[51
IVP   SERIES   I   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
sists of the redemptive acts of God in history; therefore
it   points  to  a  goal for  history  as  the  final objective  of
God's redemptive acts. This is  not  to say that the  final
historical   redemption is accomplished by  history.  Pre-
cisely here  is the  significance of the  second  coming of
Christ:   history  cannot   save  itself.   Evil   is  real.   Evil   is
greater than man,  greater than men,  and  stronger than
all history. Only a mighty act of God breaking into his-
tory  can  save  it.
This  is the  message  of the  whole  Bible. This  neces-
sity for divine intervention to  redeem history from the
curse of sinfulness and  evil is not limited to the  second
coming  of  Christ;   it   belongs  to  the  entire  redemptive
line.   The   experiences   of  Israel   in  the   Old  Testament
were  the  result   of God's intervention.   God was  acting
in history for Israel's blessing in a way He was not act-
ing  elsewhere  in human affairs. Israel alone  He  called
to be His people. Israel alone He delivered from bond-
age  and  led  into  the  land of  promise. To  Israel   alone,
and  to those who would  come under Israel's  influence,
did He promise the kingdom of God. The fulfillment of
these promises of the  kingdom would  not  be  the  prod-
uct   of history, but would  be  the  result   of a  divine  act
in history. God will arise and visit the earth in judgment
and salvation. The divine visitation will bring judgment
and  salvation  for  both  men  and  the   world  of  nature.
Out of the  ruins  of  judgment will emerge  both  a new
world, freed  from  the  curse of evil, and  a new  people,
cleansed  from  their  sins  and  renewed  in  their  hearts.
We have seen that the  New Testament fulfillment of
this Old Testament hope occurred in unexpected terms.
52]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
Before the Son of Man comes in glory to bring the king-
dom of God, He came as the suffering Servant, in weak-
ness and humility to die. However, the  New Testament
clearly teaches that both acts of the  drama of redemp-
tion  involve  nothing  less  than  an  inbreaking of   the
world of  God into  human  history.
The  life and  death of Jesus of Nazareth was no mere
«historical" event in the  modem limited scientific sense
of the  word.  Jesus was  not,   like Socrates or  Epictetus,
merely  the  product of a certain historical and religious
environment.   To  be   sure,   Jesus   appeared  in  a   given
historico-religious milieu of late Judaism,   and  He  can-
not  be  understood historically  apart from this  environ-
ment.   However,   one  can  master  the  environment  and
miss completely the significance of Jesus, for He was no
less than God incarnate in the  flesh,   «In the  beginning
was  the  Word,   and  the  Word was  with  God,   and  the
Word was God   .   .   .   And  the  Word became  flesh and
dwelt among  us"  (John 1:1,   14). One  of the  most  sig-
nificant   discoveries  of modem  gospel  criticism  is  that
the Jesus of the Synoptic Gospels is no less a portrait of
a  Divine Being than is the  Jesus of the  Fourth Gospel.
The  earliest Gospel relates  "the gospel of Jesus Christ,
the Son  of  God"   (Mark  1:1) .
Jesus of Nazareth was no mere product of history; He
was the  coming of God into history.   In  him  God dwelt
among men. In Him, the  Eternal has invaded the  tem-
poral. In Him, the Absolute is known in the  relativities
of history. The virgin birth of Jesus does not stand apart
as  an  irrelevant   legend;   it   is  of  a  piece  with  all   that
Jesus was and did. The virgin birth denotes nothing less
[53
IVP   SERIES  I   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
than that Jesus of Nazareth was not the product of his-
tory.  Only by a creative  act  of the  eternal God, an act
quite inexplicable by all the physical sciences, did Jesus
come into  the  world. The virgin birth indicates  that in
the  coming of Jesus, something happened which  tran-
scends   all   historical   causality  and  analogy.   The   pre-
existent Son of God "emptied Himself, taking  the form
of a servant, being born in the likeness of men"  (Philip-
pians   2:7).
The resurrection of Christ is of a piece with His birth.
No mere  reanimation of a corpse, it  brought into view
the emergence  of a new order  of life in human history
-resurrection  life-the  life   of   the   age  to  come.   This
was such  life as history  had never  before  experienced
and  could  not   of itself  produce.   There  is  not   nor   can
there be any natural "historical" explanation or analogy
of  the  resurrection.  It is suprahistorical. It is a  direct
unmediated  act   of  God.
TIlls act   does not imply  a  breaking of  the  "laws  of
nature." It indicates  rather that God,   the  Creator and
Lord  of nature, is not  bound by His own creation,   but
can  act   in  nature  by  powers   which  exceed  ordinary
human observation.   The  essential question is this:   Are
human history  and nature  the  measure  of God and  of
God's working? The  biblical answer is an unequivocal,
No.   While   both  man   and  nature  are   God's  creation,
both  are  marred  by  sin;   and  only  by  an  interoention
of God  can  either  be  redeemed.   Left to  itself,   human
existence  ends   in  death,   and  nature  groans  endlessly
under the burden of violence and corruption.   The  gos-
pel is the  good news  that God has  abandoned neither
54]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
man nor  the  world,  but that He  has  intervened in the
miraculous  birth,   the  miraculous  life, and  the  miracu-
lous resurrection of the incarnate Son of God. Even the
death of Christ involves a supernatural event, although
one that was entirely  unseen.   For in that awful death,
a spiritual  event was taking place. Atonement  was be-
ing  made  for   the  sins of  men.
The   incarnation  of   Christ   and  His   second  coming
alike are  both interventions  of God  in human history.
He   who  has  no  room  in  his  thinking  for   the   second
coming of Christ, because it is not an "historical" event,
or because it is not consistent with historical experience,
does not really understand the biblical  doctrine of in-
carnation.   Incarnation represents  an  invasion into  hu-
man history of the  suprahistorical realm to accomplish
for man  in history what man  could not  accomplish for
himself. The  import   of the second  comingof Christ is
similar, but  with this  difference.   The  glory of  the  in-
carnate Son was veiled; the  glory of the  returning Son
will be manifest. No real contradiction to this statement
is found in John's statement, "We have beheld his glory,
glory as of the only Son from the Father"  (John 1:14);
for the  glory to which John refers was  not an unveiled
glory but a concealed glory, evident only to the  eye of
faith. Jesus first "manifested his glory" at Cana of Gali-
lee when He changed the water into wine  (John 2: 11),
but this  glory was seen only by  His disciples who  be-
lieved on Him. All that others experienced at Cana was
unusually  good wine.  God's  glory was  there,   but in a
hidden  form,   seen  only  by  faith.
When Christ comes again, His glory will be unveiled,
[55
IVP   SERIES  I   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
displayed to the world. He will come "on the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory» (Matthew 24:30).
«He will sit on His glorious throne» (Matthew 25:31).
He who came once to Bethlehem, to be greeted only by
a handful of shepherds, will return  to  be  seen by  all.
But  in  both  incarnation  and  second advent,   the  same
Lord comesfromheaven to earth for man's redemption.
Therefore in a real sense, the coming of the kingdom
of God means both  the  redemption of history and  the
end of history. It is not incorrect to think of the kingdom
of God as a realm "beyond history," if by this we imply
that the kingdomof God will involve an order of human
existence transcending all past historical experience. It
will be life in time and space on the earth; yet it will be
life of a new and different order, for it will be human
earthly existence lifted out of its present weakness, de-
cay,   strife,   and  death.
This fact is evident even in the  Old Testament hope
of  redemption.   «The lion  shall  eat   straw  like  the   ox»
(Isaiah 11:7). How are these words to be interpreted?
Are we to think  of carnivorous animals with  the  teeth
and digestive organs of cattle? The Scripture obviously
does not ask such questions. This statement means that
nature  will   be  freed  from  violence. The  lion  will  no
longer prey on the ox, but will become placid. This sin-
gle statement suggests a complete transformation of na-
ture that we can scarcely imagine. What will nature be
like  without   the   struggle  for  survival  and  the   strong
preying  upon  the  weak? What   will the  world  be  like
without  the  cycle of life and  death?  Obviously it will
not be nature as we know it, but nature lifted to a new
56]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
level of existence that surpasses the limits of all human
experience.
The   New  Testament   teaching   of   resurrection   re-
flects the same kind of transformation. In  the resurrec-
tion, they "neither marry nor are given in marriage, for
they  cannot   die  any more,  because  they  are  equal   to
angels» (Luke 20:35-36)   in  this fact:   that there  is no
death   and  therefore   no  need  of   procreation  and  the
marriage  relationship.   But   when  we  reflect   on  these
words,   how  can  we,   in  terms   of  present   experience,
conceive of human existence without  aging and  dying,
procreation,   and  the  sexual relationship?  From  a  bio-
logical   point   of   view,   the  entire   present   human  en-
deavor centers around the sexual function. Such words
indicate  that the  life of the  age to come will stand  in
continuity with present history but will be different-so
different that we can scarcely conceive of it even in the
imagination, let  alone in  terms of actual  experience.
The rapture of the  Church  at the  return  of Christ is
another  element in  this  transition  from present history
to the life of the age to come. When Christ comes, "the
dead  in  Christ   will rise flrst,   then  we  who  are  alive,
who are left, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the  air;   and so we shall
always be  with  the  Lord» (I Thessalonians 4:16-17).
The word "rapture» comes from the Latin rendering of
"caught up» (rapiemur). For the living, it is equivalent
to the resurrection of the dead. The dead in Christ will
be raised; the living in Christ will be caught up to meet
the   Lord.   This   designates   the   same   transformation
into   resurrection   life   for   both   the   dead   and   living
[57
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT
saints. 'We shall not   all sleep  [in death], but we  shall
all be  changed"   (I Corinthians  15:51).   Both the  dead
and the living who have already mown the resurrection
life of Christ in history will experience the  redemption
of  the  body.  "For  this  corruptible  must   put  on  incor-
ruption,   and   this   mortal   must   put   on   immortality"
(I Corinthians  15:53, AV). The rapture of the  Church
is the event by which the saved who are alive at Christ's
return are  translated into  the  resurrection life without
passing  through  death.   It  is  the   symbol   of   transition
into   a   new  order   of   life   that   transcends   all   present
historical   experience.
Yet not   quite;   for  "Christ   has  been raised  from  the
dead,   the  first fruits  of  those  who  have  fallen  asleep"
(I  Corinthians   15:20).   We  have   already  pointed  out
that the  resurrection of Christ   was  an  actual event oc-
curring in history, and yet  that it stands  apart from all
history,   without   historical   causality  and  without   his-
torical   analogy. It was  not   the  reanimation of  a  dead
corpse but the emergence of a neworder of life, appear-
ing  in  history,   but   going beyond all historical   experi-
ence.
The Gospels record that the resurrection body of Jesus
was  a  real body  which  could  be  seen, heard,   and  felt,
yet   that   it   was   different.   Jesus   could   go  and   come
freely.   He   suddenly   appeared   among   His   disciples
(John 20:19; Luke  24:36)   and with equal suddenness
disappeared   (Luke   24:31).   The   Gospels   relate   this
strange conduct without comment or embellishment as
simple  "historical"   facts.   The   only  adequate  explana-
tion  is that the  resurrection body  of  Jesus  was  a  real
58]
JESUS   CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
body  that   moved,   nevertheless,   in  a  higher   order   of
existence, exceeding the ordinary laws of space and mo-
tion. Does this not involve essentially the same issue as
that of a world in which the  lion eats straw like an ox,
in  which  there  is  neither procreation nor  dying?  God
has implanted in  the  heart of human history  an  event
which  will   ultimately  transform  human  historical   ex-
perience   in   the   immortality  and   redeemed   resurrec-
tion life of the  age to come. Christ's resurrection in his-
tory is the  beginning of the  eschatological resurrection
at   the  last day.
Here is the fundamental meaning-of the second com-
ing  of Christ for  history.   Man  cannot redeem  himself,
nor can history produce the kingdom of God. Perverted
by sin, man has lost his way. Burdened by evil, history
of  itseH is  doomed.   Speaking  as  a  purely  "objective"
historian,   Bultmann  rightly  describes   the   search   for
meaning in history as meaningless. Such familiar names
as  Auschwitz  and. Dachau  speak  of  the  snarl   of   irra-
tional   and  demonic  threads  in  the  warp  and  woof  of
history, which men cannot weave into a meaningful and
purposeful  pattern.
The gospel is the good news that God has abandoned
neither man  nor history. In the  incarnation  of  Christ,
God has invaded human history to defeat the forces of
evil that man cannot conquer. In the second coming of
Christ,   God will again  invade  history  to finish the  re-
deeming work He  has begun.   Redemption from begin-
ning to end is the work of Godwho transcends  history.
The return of Christ is the means by which redemption
will   be  consummated.   Even  so  come, Lord  Jesus!
[59
SUGGESTED  FURTHER  READINGS
BOWMAN, JOHN WICK, The  Religion of Maturity. New York:
Abingdon-Cokesbury  Press,   1948.
__,   Prophetic   Realism  and   the   Gospel.   Philadelphia:
The Westminster Press,   1955. While these books are  not
primarily  concerned  with  the  second  coming  of   Christ,
they provide an  exposition of the  theology of "Prophetic
Realism," which turns attention away from  the return of
Christ   to   center   it   upon  the  present   working  of   God's
kingdom "on  the plane of  history."
BULTMANN,   RUDOLF,   Jesus   Christ   and   Mythology.   New
York:   Charles Scribner's  Sons, 1958.
__, The  Presence of Eternity. New York: Harper & Bros.,
1957. The former  book  provides an  introduction to  Bult-
mann's  program of "demythologizing," and the latter is a
positive exposition of Bultmann's attitude toward history.
CAIRNS, EARLE E., "Philosophy of History," in Contemporary
Evangelical Thought, Carl F. H. Henry, ed.,   Great Neck,
N. Y.: Channel Press,   1957. An  excellent brief  survey  of
various  philosophies of history.
CAMPBELL,   RODERICK, Israel and the  New Covenant.  Phila-
delphia:   Presbyterian  and  Reformed  Pub.   Co.,   1954.   A
"postmillennial"  study  which  includes  the  salvation  and
christianization of the world within the church's historical
mission.
COLLINGWOOD, R.  G., The  Idea  of History.   New  York:   Ox-
ford   University  Press,   1946.   A  survey   of   the   history  of
historiography, together with an  exposition of one  of the
most  inBuential   modern interpretations  of  history.
60]
JESUS  CHRIST  AND  HISTORY
CULLMANN,   OSCAR,   Christ   and  Time.   Philadelphia:   West-
minster Press,   1950.
--, "The Return of Christ" in  The Early Church,  A. J. B.
Higgins,   ed.,   PhUadelphia:   Westminster   Press,   1956.   A
critical European scholar defends the view  that redemp-
tive  history must   have  an  eschatological  goal.
DODD,   CHARLES   HAROLD,   The   Parables  of   the   Kingdom.
New  York:  Charles Scribner's  Sons, 1958.
---, The  Apostolic Preaching and its Developments. New
York:  Harper & Bros., 1960.
--, The  Coming  of   Christ.   Cambridge:   The   University
Press,   1951. The  first   book  deals   with  the  teachings   of
Jesus   and  contains   Dodd's   "symbolic"   interpretation  of
apocalyptic language. The second  book  gives Dodd's de-
fense   of   "realized  eschatology."   The   third  book  is   his
most   recent   interpretation   of   the   second   coming   of
Christ.
LADD,   GEORGE  ELDON,   Crucial   QuestiOns  about the  King-
dom  of God.   Grand  Rapids:   Eerdmans  Pub.   Co.,   1952.
--, The Gospel of the  Kingdom.  Grand Rapids:  Erdmans
Pub.   Co.,  1959. These  two  books   offer  an  interpretation
of the  kingdom of God  both as God's redemptive acts  in
history and  the eschatological goal   of  history.
--, "The  Saving  Acts  of   God,"  in  Basic  Christian  Doc-
trines,C.   F.   H.   Henry,   ed.,   New  York:   Holt,   Rinehart,
and Winston, 1962. A brief statement of the biblical  COD-
cept of revelation in  redemptive  history.
McINTYRE, JOHN, The  Christian Doctrine of History.  Grand
Rapids:   Wm.   B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1957. The theme is
discussed  from  a more philosophical perspective than the
present essay.
ROBERTS, T. A., History and  Christian Apologetic. London:
Society for  the Promotion of Christian Knowledge,  1960.
[61
IVP   SERIES   /   CONTEMPORARY   CHRISTIAN   THOUGHT
An excellent essay pointing up  the  limitations  of a strict
historical method  in  interpreting Christian origins.
SUMMEIlS,   Ru,   The   Life   Beyond.   Nashville:   Broadman
Press, 1959. A comprehensive  study  of biblical   eschatol-
ogy from  a conservative  amillennial viewpoint.
WALVOORD,   JOHN,   The  Millennial  Kingdom.   Findlay,   Ohio:
Dunham  Pub.   Co.,   1959. A detailed  defense  of the  dis-
pensational interpretation.
62]