      The Prodigal God
Recovering the center of the Christian faith

               Timothy Keller
      Bachelor's degree in Applied Linguistics to Translation, and Translator from English and Japanese to Spanish


                                               Table of contents
Introduction

The Parable

Chapter 1
The people around Jesus:Everyone gathered around him to hear him.
Two types of people
Why do people like Jesus but not the Church?

Chapter 2
The Two Lost Sons:
A man had two sons
The lost youngest son
The plan of the youngest son
The Lost Elder Son

Chapter 3
Redefining sin:
"How many years have I served you?"
Two ways to find happiness
Two lost sons
A deeper understanding of sin
Both wrong, both beloved

Chapter 4
Redefining doom.
Indignant, the older brother refused to enter
Superiority and anger
Servitude and futility
Who needs to know it?

Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Redefining hope:
He/She went to a distant country
Our longing to return home
The nostalgia for home
The party at the end of the story

Chapter 7
The party made by the father:
"He/She heard the music of the dance"

Salvation is experiential
Salvation is material
Salvation is personal
Salvation is public
Babette's Feast
                                       Introduction
The intention of this brief book is to present the essential points of the Christian message,
that is to say, the Gospel, which serves as an introduction to the Christian faith for those who do not
they are familiar with their teachings or those who have distanced themselves from them for some
time.
However, this volume is not only for seekers, as many believers who have
Christians have long believed that they understand the fundamentals quite well.
Christian faith, without thinking that they need a manual. However, one of the signs of
that, perhaps, you do not understand the radical and unique nature of the Gospel is that it
sure to do it.
Sometimes, those who have been members of the church for a long time find themselves so
beaten and disturbed by a new vision regarding the Christian message that they have
the impression that they have essentially been 'reconverted'. So, this book was
written for the curious non-affiliated and for the established affiliates of the faith. To these
last, Jesus calls them "little brothers" and the others he calls "brothers"
"elders" in the famous parable of the Prodigal Son.
Furthermore, I return to this family narrative, found in chapter fifteen of the Gospel
according to Saint Luke, in order to reach the heart of the Christian faith. For his part, the argument
and thedramatis personaeThey are very simple: First, a father had two sons. The
the younger one asked for his share of the inheritance, received it, and shortly after left for a country
distant, where he squandered everything on sensual and frivolous pleasures. After that, he returned
repentant at home and, to his surprise, his father welcomed him with open arms, he
which alienated and enraged the older brother very much. In the end, the story concludes with the
father begging his firstborn to join the party, in the welcome and in forgiveness
given to his younger brother.
Apparently, the narrative is not all that captivates. Despite this, I believe that if
we compare the teaching of Jesus to a lake, this famous parable would be one of the
places where we can see everything to the bottom.
On the other hand, many excellent studies have been written about this biblical text.
for the last few years, but the foundation for my understanding of him was a sermon
what I heard more than thirty years ago preached by Dr. Edmund P. Clowney.
My way of perceiving Christianity changed upon hearing it, and over the years, I have returned.
often teach and advise based on this parable. As a result, I have
I have seen more animated, more enlightened, and more helped people thanks to this passage.
than any other, when explaining its true meaning.
Once I traveled in the open sea and gave this sermon through an interpreter; time
after the translator wrote it down to tell me, he had realized that the
the parable was like an arrow stuck in his heart as he preached, and after
of the history; And even Jesus himself does not call it that, but begins by saying:
A father had two sons. So, the story is about both the older brother
as well as the father and the children. And it could well be named 'The
parable of the two lost sons
According to the dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy, prodigal does not mean
rebellious, willful, disobedient or misguided, but rather "wastes his estate on
useless and vain expenses, without measure, order or reason." In other words, it is to spend everything
that one has until being left with nothing. Therefore, it is so appropriate within the story.
this expression to describe both the father and his youngest son. Thus, the welcome
what the father gives to the repentant son was, literally, reckless, since he refused to
to take his sin into account or to demand compensation. This response offended the son.
mayor and, probably, to the majority of the local community.
In this story, the father represents the Heavenly Father, whom Jesus teaches very well.
this, Saint Paul writes the following: "God was in Christ reconciling himself to
world, not taking their sins into account" (2 Corinthians 5:19,Reina Version
Valera Review of the year 1995Here, Jesus shows us the God of great expenditure, the one who
it is nothing if it is not generous towards its children, our hope being the reckless one
grace of God, a life-changing experience and the theme of this book.
                                          The parabola
                                       Luke 15:1-3, 11-32

(Based on the New International Version, with some verses translated by the)
author)

1 Many tax collectors and sinners were approaching Jesus to hear him, 2 of
So the Pharisees and the experts in the Law began to murmur: "This man
receives sinners and eats with them.” 3 Then he told them this parable...
11 "A man had two sons—Jesus continued—12 The younger of them said to his
father: "Dad, give me what I deserve from the inheritance." So the father distributed his assets.
between the two. Shortly after, the youngest son gathered all that he had, and went to a country
distant; there he lived recklessly and squandered his inheritance. 14 When he had spent
Then, a great shortage occurred in the region, and he began to experience need.
So he went and got a job with a citizen of that country, who sent him to his
fields to take care of pigs. 16 He was so hungry that he would have wanted to fill himself up.
stomach with the food they gave to the pigs, but still no one gave him anything.
Finally, he reflected and said: 'How many of my father's laborers have food to spare, and I'
Here I am dying of hunger! 18 I have to go back to my father and tell him: 'Father, I have sinned'
against heaven and against you, 19 I no longer deserve to be called your son; treat me as one
from your laborers.” Then he began the journey and went to his father.
He was still far away when his father saw him and had compassion on him; he ran out to meet him.
he met him, hugged him and kissed him. 21The young man said to him: 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and
against you. I no longer deserve to be called your son.
But the father ordered his servants: "Quick! Bring the best dress for
dress him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet. Bring the
fat calf and kill it to celebrate a feast. 24 For this son of mine was
dead, but has come back to life; it had been lost, but we have already found it.
that they started to party.
25 Meanwhile, the elder son was in the field. When he returned, as he approached the
house, heard the music of the dance. 26 Then he called one of the servants and asked him what
was happening.
27 "Your brother has arrived," he replied, "and your father has killed the fattened calf.
because he has recovered safe and sound.
28 Indignant, the older brother refused to enter. So his father went out to plead with him.
that he would do it. 29 But he answered him: "Look at how many years I have served you without
never disobey your orders, and you haven't even given me a goat to celebrate a party with
My friends! 30 But now comes that son of yours, who has squandered your fortune with
prostitutes, and you order the fat calf to be killed in his honor!
31 "My son," said the father, "you are always with me, and everything I have is yours. 32
                                              1

            The people who gather around Jesus
                                 They gathered to hear him


                                 Two types of people
Most interpretations of this parable have focused on the journey and the
return of the younger brother—the “prodigal son,” which, however, causes him to be lost
the true message of the story, as there are two brothers, who represent two
different ways of distancing oneself from God, and two different ways of seeking acceptance in Him
Kingdom of Heaven.
It is of utmost importance that we take note of the historical context provided by the author for
the teaching of Christ. In the first two verses of the chapter, Luke recounts that
There were two groups of people who had come to listen to him.
First, there were the "tax collectors and sinners." These, men and women,
correspond to the younger brother. They did not observe the moral laws established by the
Bible, nor the rules of ceremonial purity followed by religious Jews, therefore,
they lived a "reckless life"; and as the younger brother, "they left home" at
abandon the traditional morality of their families and respectable society.
The second group of listeners was that of the 'Pharisees and interpreters of the Law', who
they were represented by the older brother. For their part, they clung to morality
traditional of their ancestors, studied and obeyed the Scriptures, worshiped God
with fidelity and prayed continually.
With great economy, Lucas shows us the different way in which both groups
respond to Jesus. The present progressive of the Greek verb translated as 'they were gathering' gives to
understanding that the attraction of younger siblings towards Our Lord was a pattern
constant in his ministry, which explains that they would continuously gather around him,
confusing and angering both the religious and the moralists. The evangelist
This man welcomes sinners and
eat with them.” However, in the Ancient Near East, sitting and eating with
someone was a sample of acceptance.
So, what they were saying was: How dare Jesus reach out to sinners like
What? Those people never come to our services! I couldn't tell them the truth as
We do it ourselves! It will only tell them what they want to hear!
Therefore, to whom is the teaching of Jesus addressed in this parable? To the second.
When I first heard this parable, I imagined the eyes of the listeners.
originals who shed tears as they learned how God would love them and
I would always welcome them, no matter what they had done.
However, if we do that, we give it a sentimental character, as the objectives
It is not the 'wayward sinners' in this story, but the religious who do everything.
what the Bible demands.
Not even Jesus is arguing with the unaligned immoral or with morals.
affiliates, but rather wants to show them their blindness, narrow-mindedness, and self-righteousness, and how it is
destroying this kind of things their soul and the life of those around them.
Therefore, it is a mistake to think that he tells this story with the purpose of
to ensure, basically, their unconditional love for younger siblings.
No, the original listeners were not shattered in tears due to this tale, but
rather, they were amazed, offended, and irritated. So their purpose did not
It was to excite our hearts, not to shatter our categories.
Through this parable, Our Lord challenges what almost everyone has thought at some point.
about God, sin, and salvation, revealing the destructive egocentrism of
younger brother, but at the same time condemning, in the harshest terms, the moralistic life
of the older brother. Furthermore, it states that both religious and non-religious people are
spiritually lost, that both forms of life are a dead end, and that has
All thought that the human race has had regarding how is wrong.
relate to God.



                Why do people like Jesus, but not the Church?
Both elder siblings and younger siblings find themselves today with
we in the same society and, often, in the same family.
Often, the older brother in a family is the one who pleases the parents,
he is responsible, and he is the one who obeys the standards imposed by them. On the other hand,
the younger brother tends to be the rebel, the free spirit who prefers company and the
admiration of peers; the first child grows up, takes a conventional job, and
establish close to dad and mom, while the younger brother goes to live in the
despised neighborhoods of New York and Los Angeles.
In more recent times, these natural differences in temperament have been accentuated,
and at the beginning of the 19th century, industrialization gave rise to a new middle class, the
bourgeois, which sought legitimacy through a work ethic of hard work and
moral rectitude. But in response to the perceived hypocrisy and rigidity of this social class,
bohemian communities emerged, from the Paris of Henri Murger in the decade of
1840 to the Bloomsbury group in London, the Beats of Greenwich Village, and the
indie-rock scenes of today.
                                              6
                            Redefining hope
                               He/She went to a distant country



                            Our nostalgia for home

It is important that we read the parable of the lost son within the context of the Gospel.
according to Saint Luke, chapter 15, although the story has an even greater context. In fact,
if we read it in the light of the extensive theme of exile and the return home explained by the
Bible, we will understand that Jesus has given us more than a moving story of
individual redemption, for it has recounted the history of all of humankind to us again,
promising us nothing less than hope for the world.
In the parable told by Our Lord, the younger brother goes to a distant country.
hoping to have a better life, but is disappointed. As a result, she begins to
missing home, remembering the food that was at his father's house. This is how we do it
everyone.
The concept of home exerts a powerful influence on human life. For example,
Americans born abroad spend billions of dollars each year
in visiting the communities where they were born. On the other hand, the children who never
they find a place where they believe they belong, they carry within themselves an inability to
affection in their adulthood. And also, many of us have good and affectionate
memories of the times, of the people, and of the places where we thought that
we were truly at home. However, if we ever have the opportunity
returning to the places we remember with such affection usually gives us
we disappoint. If I give you another example, my wife Kathy, for thirty-nine years,
spends the summers with his family in a dilapidated little house by the lakeside
Erie. The same memories of that place nourish Kathy's spirit. But the
returning to the current and already ruined property becomes a heartbreaking
experience, since it will not be different if someone buys it and builds on it
new apartments; and a visit to the place will always give a sense of loss.
Moreover, home is a powerful yet elusive concept, as the strong
feelings that surround him reveal a deep longing that is within
we for a place that fits us, where we can be, or perhaps, find ourselves.
However, it seems that no true place or true family satisfies these.
longings, despite the fact that many situations incite them. In her novel titledA peace
separated the main character of John Knowles discovers that summer mornings
For example, many people from my church have shared with me how disappointing it is for them.
both Christmas and Thanksgiving. In addition, they prepare for the holidays
with the hope that, finally, this year, the family gathers in that
important place, I delivered the experience of warmth, joy, comfort, and love that
they desire it.
There is a German expression that conveys this concept, longing The
dictionaries will indicate that there is no simple synonym in Spanish, denoting a
deep nostalgia or longing, but with a transcendent allusion. In relation to this,
C.S. Lewis was the one who wrote the most about this 'spiritual nostalgia' in his famous
sermon "The power of glory". Here, it refers to many similar experiences such as
as described by Steinbeck and Knowles, then saying:

Our most common resource is to call it beauty, behaving as if there had been
subject resolved.
The resource used by Wordsworth was meant to identify him with certain moments of his
own past. But all of this is a deception. And if Wordsworth had returned to such
moments of the past, I would not have discovered the thing itself, but only the one who remembers it;
What I remembered would come out to be a memory in itself. The books or the music in which
we think that beauty is found there, it will betray us if we trust in it; no
I was in them, I only came through them, and what came through them was the
longing. These things: beauty, the memories of our past, are good images of
what we really desire; but if they are wrong about the thing itself, they become
silent idols, that break the hearts of their worshippers. For they are not the thing.
same…Now we wake up to find…We have been mere spectators, for the
beauty has smiled, but not to welcome us; her face has turned towards us.
address, but not to see us. We have also not been accepted, received, or
admitted...

Our lifelong nostalgia, our longing to be reunited with something in the universe, of
how we feel isolated, to be within a door that we have seen from
outside, it is not just a mere and neurotic whim, but the most real index of our reality
situation.

It seems that there is, then, a sense in which we are all like the younger brother.
We are all in exile, always missing home; we are always traveling,
but never arriving; the houses and families that we currently inhabit are just inns to
along the way, but they are not home. This concept continues to elude us.
Why would "home" be so powerful, and yet so elusive for us? We may find
the response while we examine one of the most penetrating themes of the Bible; and the
the experience we have been describing is the imprint on our souls of this tale
more extensive.
At the beginning of the book of Genesis, we learn the reason why people feel
However, the Bible teaches us that, as stated in the parable told by
Jesus Christ, God was the 'father' of that home and we got angry for his authority;
we wished to live without God interfering in our lives, and so we set ourselves apart, we reached
by distancing ourselves from him, and we lost our home for the same reason as the younger brother.
The result was exile.
The Scriptures tell us that, from that moment on, we have been wandering like
spiritual exiles. In other words, we have been living in a world that no longer
fits with our deepest desires.
Although we long for bodies that "run and are not tired," we have come to be
subjected to illness, aging, and death; although we need love
may it last, all our relationships are subject to the inevitable entropy of time,
disintegrating those in our hands; even the people who remain faithful to
we die and leave us, or we die and leave them; and although we wish
make a difference in the world through our work, we experience a
endless frustration, as we will never fully and completely carry out our
dreams and hopes. Perhaps we work hard to recreate the home we have lost,
but, the Bible says that this exists only in the presence of the Heavenly Father, of the
that we have fled.
This theme, on the other hand, occurs over and over again in the Bible. After the exile of
Adam and Eve from their most important home, their son Cain was forced to wander endlessly.
for the land for murdering his brother Abel; after Jacob deceived his father and
his brother fled into exile for many years; after that, Joseph, the son of Jacob and
his family was taken from their homeland to Egypt due to the hunger that was there. There, the
The Israelites were enslaved until, led by Moses, they returned to their homeland.
Ancestral. Hundreds of years later, David, before he became king, lived as a fugitive.
the one being hunted; and finally, the entire nation of Israel was exiled again,
taken captive to Babylon by King Nebuchadnezzar.
It is no coincidence that one story after another contains the pattern of exile, for the
the message of the Scriptures is that the human race is a band of exiles trying to
return home, so that the parable of the prodigal sonancient expression for
referring to lost child , note from the translatorIt is about each one of us.


                               The difficulty of return

"Home"—said Robert Frost famously—is where, when you have to go, they must.
"to admit you" ("The Death of the Hired Man"). However, the younger brother knows
that a successful return is not inevitable. Why? The reason is that their sins have
a barrier has been created, not knowing how that wall can be broken; moreover, it knows
that could be rejected and forced to remain in exile. In the same way, the
The Bible shows us how great the barriers are, as human race, for our
return home.
the anguish of death, because it was impossible for death to keep him under its
dominion" (Acts 2:24).
And as he paid with his death the penalty for our sins., obtained victory over the
forces of death, destruction, and disorder, which prevent the world from being ours
true home. But one day he will return, to complete this victory.
Regarding this matter, the prophet Isaiah writes:
Your God will come... He will come to save them. Then the eyes of the blind will be opened and
“



the ears of the deaf will be opened; the lame will leap like a deer, and the mute will shout for joy.
language of the mute... And the redeemed by the LORD will return, and they will enter Zion with
songs of joy, crowned with eternal joy. They will be reached by joy and the
"joy, and sadness and sighing will flee away" (Isaiah 35)

At the end of the story about the prodigal sons, there is a celebration of returning home. From the
in the same way, at the end of the book of Revelation, there is a feast: the 'dinner of the
the wedding of the Lamb" (Revelation 19).
Well, the Lamb is Christ, who was sacrificed for the sins of the world, so that
we could be forgiven and then taken home. Furthermore, the party takes place in
the New Jerusalem, the City of God, which descends from heaven to fill the earth
Revelation 21-22. We have also been told that the very presence of God
find in this city, and it is also, extraordinarily, the tree of life,
whose leaves now effect 'the health of the nations' (Revelation 22:2). For its part,
this tree of life was located in the Garden of Eden. And at the conclusion of this story, all the
the earth has become once again in the Garden of God. Consequently, death, the
destruction and suffering have gone; and the nations are no longer at war, for 'He
He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death, or mourning, or crying, or pain,
"because the former things have passed away" (Revelation 21:4)
Unlike the founders of other major religions, it gives hope for the
common life of man. In fact, our future is not a form of ethereal consciousness
it's impersonal; we won't float in the air either, but rather, we will eat, we will hug,
we will sing, laugh and dance in the Kingdom of God, in degrees of power, of glory and
of joy that, in the present, we cannot imagine.
Indeed, Our Lord will make the world our perfect home once again;
therefore, we will no longer live to the "East of Eden", always wandering and never arriving.
Then, we will arrive, and the father will find us, will receive us in his arms, and will bring us.
to the party.
                                                 7
                                  Father's Day
                                he/she heard the music of the dance




If we believe in the Gospel, resting in the work that Jesus does, and we receive a
new identity and a new relationship with God, what comes next? How will we live
our lives when we live them based on his message about sin, of the
grace, and of hope?
In the predictions made by the prophet Isaiah regarding the new heavens and the new earth
new, he declares that, like all returns home, this last one will be characterized
for the most important feast (Isaiah 25). Likewise, Our Lord represents
constantly delivering salvation as if it were a celebration; and to its followers they
he said: "many will come from the east and the west, and will partake in the banquet with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven Matthew 8:11
                                                       ”



In addition, he left a meal, which we now call the Lord's Supper or Eucharist, as
a sign of his saving grace. And of course, the parable of the lost sons, the
which is narrated by Jesus Christ, ends in a celebration that represents the great festival of
God, when does that story end?
Why does he express it this way? He does so because there is no better way to give.
to vividly understand what it means to have a life based on His saving work; and,
there are four ways to experience a party that correspond to the ways in which
may our lives be shaped by the evangelistic message of Christ the Lord.


                              Salvation is experiential

A party is a place where our appetites and our senses—the sight, the smell,
hearing, and taste—are satisfied. It has been told to us in John 2 that Jesus attended
at a reception for a wedding, where the wine had run out quickly.
Both the bride and groom as well as 'the head waiter', what we could call 'the master of ceremonies'
ceremonies", they were at risk of being socially humiliated. However, in their
first exercise of divine power, the Lord turned several large into wine
water receptacles. And admirably, the evangelist John calls this miracle
a 'sign', a meaning of what is related to the ministry of Christ. Why
what would this be your inaugural act? Why, to communicate what had come to
I would choose to turn 150 gallons of water into wine so that it would be a party.
would it follow its course?
The answer is that Jesus came to bring the joy of the festival. He is the true
On this particular matter, in his famous sermon titled 'A divine and supernatural light',
Jonathan Edwards says:

There is a difference between believing that God is holy and full of grace, and having in the
heart a new sense of love and the beauty of that holiness and grace. For, the
the difference between believing that God is full of grace and proving that God is, is such as
to have a rational faith that honey is sweet and to possess the true sense of its sweetness.

The salvation that Jesus Christ gives us is a celebration, and therefore, by believing in his work and
to rest in what He has done for us through the Holy Spirit, is made
patent in our hearts. Their love is like honey, or like wine. And more than believing
who loves, we will be able to feel the reality, the beauty, and the power of his love, since his
love will become real for you more than the love of anyone else, being able to
charming him, stimulating him, and comforting him. That will lift him up and free him from fear like
nothing else would do it.
This makes the difference, since if you are filled with guilt and shame, you do not need
not only believe in the abstract concept of God's mercy, but should
to feel, as if it were, the sweetness of his mercy on the palate of the heart;
then you will know that you have been accepted. And if you are full of anxieties and
concerns, one not only needs to believe that God takes control of history, but that
he should see, with the eyes of the heart, his dazzling majesty. Thus he will know that he has
everything in your hands.
Is it really possible to have this kind of experiences? Some find it more
difficult for others, because they have a more rational and controlled temperament. Others,
I believe they are so hungry for mystical experiences that they see every intuition and
every strong emotion like it was a 'word from the Lord'. In brief terms, the
Most of us are either very anxious or not enough for what Jesus offers.
But what it offers is access to the presence of the Father. For now, that is just a
anticipation, and it experiences ups and downs over the years, while we pray and seek His face
with the help of the Holy Spirit. Even so, it is available.
The hymnologist Isaac Watts speaks of this in the following lines:
The mount of Zion gives thousands of sacred pleasures before we reach the fields.
heavenly, let us walk on the streets of gold.


                                Salvation is material

A meal is a physical experience. Jesus left a meal: the Lord's Supper, to
that would be remembered; and the ultimate goal of the story is a meal: the Dinner of the
Wedding of the Lamb (Revelation 19). Additionally, the risen Christ ate with His
disciples when he met them (Luke 24:42-43; John 21:9). But, what
Does it mean all that? A sign that, for him, this material world matters.
(which no man can count) increase the pleasure that all of us
we have from God. Because every soul, upon seeing it on its path, undoubtedly communicates
that unique vision to the rest. That, says an ancient author, is the reason that the
seraphim from Isaiah's vision call out to one another: “Holy, holy, holy” (Isaiah 6:3).
And the more we share the Bread of Heaven among us, the more we will have it.

Lewis says that it took a community to identify it as an individual.
How much more would this be true of Jesus Christ? Generally, Christians claim that
they wish to have a relationship with Christ, that is, they want to "know Him better". Without
embargo, you will not be able to do it alone, but you must be very involved in
the Church, within the Christian community, with firm relationships of love and
responsibility. And only if it is part of a community of believers who seek to resemble
to Jesus, to serve him and love him, he will know him and grow in his likeness.




                                    Babette's Feast

The great parable of the prodigal son retells the story of the Bible and the story of
the human race. Within it, Christ teaches that the two forms of life that are most
common are, equally, a dead end. Moreover, it shows us how alone he is.
In his person and work, you will find the arguments of our life a resolution and an ending.
happy.
The cherished story written by Isak Dinesen, 'Babette's Feast,' also culminates
with a party, teaching us at the same time about two usual lifestyles that
inadequate results and the reality of a different alternative.
The story expressed by Dinesen is about two older women, Martina and
Philippa, daughters of a very strict pastor who had founded a small church in their village
religious sect. As they grew up, both women were tempted to lead a life of
sensuality. One of them, Martina, was courted by a young and handsome lieutenant who
He wanted to take her away from there; the other one, Philippa, was being sought by the director of the Opera of
Paris, who had been fascinated by the purity and clarity of her voice. In the end, both
women turned away from the life of worldly pleasures in order to help their father in his
mission; and after he died, they continued presiding over the strict community
religious and moral in a small village located on the desolate coast of Jutland,
west of Denmark.
But things were not going well for the community, as people's lives became so cold and
sterile as the humid, gray, and windy weather of the region. In fact, almost everyone had
had an altercation with another in the city, and many didn't even talk to each other. Furthermore, the
pride and the reasons for complaints had been fostered, and bitterness had increased
reaching painful proportions. In absolute terms, the town was a place lacking
of joy.
less than the young and handsome lieutenant who had courted Martina many years ago
back, now being a great general.
When the general arrived in the car, he reflected on the past, feeling that there had not been
finding happiness despite all her worldly success. She remembered Martina and
his spiritual seriousness, wondering if he had overlooked what really
was important in life. However, Martina and Philippa had not achieved what
they expected, even though they followed the path of religious service.
Then, they all sat at the table and started to eat, and immediately they were left
astonished by the exquisite quality and perfect preparation of the food. Additionally, the
the powerful effect of the party began to break down people's defenses. Under the
influence of the wonderful food and drink, one by one, former enemies
they began to become affectionate towards each other, starting to exchange words and comments
as sweet as food. And besides, forgiveness was sought and granted.
On the other hand, two women who had not spoken to each other for many years, touched.
affectionately on the forehead, saying: 'God bless you, Solveig' and 'You too,
"Dear Anna." Finally, Philippa prepared to sing with her beautiful and pure voice,
listening to her and hearing her by all those present.
Then, the general stood up to speak, and quoted Psalm 85: "Love and truth come together.
they will find; peace and justice will kiss each other"; and then he said that, during the
food, had come to realize that, for some reason, they can be together
joy and morality, and the ethical and the sensual.
The writer precisely resolves the lines of this story: the inhabitants of
that town experiences community health. On the other hand, Babette is also
transformed. In fact, she felt like a stranger in the place, but now she found herself
at home and was no longer a refugee; and even, the general leaves without the memories with which
that had arrived there.
Still, history does not provide us with a clear answer to the question that so
good formula.
But both the worldly life of sensual pleasures and the religious life of strictness
ethics fail to give to the heart of man what it is searching for. To this, the great
Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, who influenced Isak Dinesen, referred to these
ways such as: “aesthetics and ethics,” showing in his writings that neither of these
Approaches to life were the right one. But what is the alternative?
Well, at Babette's feast, the dinners possess the momentary mystical experience, in
those two things: justice and truth, come together. Dinesen is
professing their belief that there is something beyond these two alternatives, something that is not
neither the selfishness of the 'aesthetic' nor the severity of the 'ethical', although I could not find
a better way to represent that something than a wonderful meal, a great party.
However, the parable told by Jesus answers the question posed so
skillfully. He says: 'I am the bread of heaven.' Furthermore, he tells us that both the way
the sensuality of the younger brother as the ethical path of the older brother are dead ends without
spiritual exits; it also shows us that there is another alternative: through him. And the
6
  On this mountain, the LORD Almighty will prepare for all peoples a
feast of special delicacies, a feast of aged wines, of special delicacies and
of select aged wines. 7 On this mountain, the veil that covers all will be torn.
peoples, the mantle that envelops all nations.           8
                                                           He will devour death to
Always; the LORD almighty will wipe away the tears from every face, and will remove from all
the earth the reproach of its people. The LORD himself has said it. (Isaiah 25:6-8).
                                    Recognitions
I thank Jill Lamar, David MacCormick, and Brian Tart again, whose skill
literary and personal support have allowed this book to be written. As always,
thanks to Janice Worth and Lynn Land, who make it possible for me to study and write in
peace for two weeks every summer. And also, I thank the people of the Church
Presbyterian 'The Redeemer', who opened their minds and hearts to the counter
intuitive message of this book.
Years ago, I heard Dr. Ed. Clowney preach about the parable of the prodigal son, what
that changed my way of thinking about Christianity and how to communicate it.
As the years went by, while I was getting to know him, I also learned from him that it was possible to
to be theologically deep, absolutely orthodox, and yet faithfully grateful,
making that a rare and valuable combination.
And if I had to make a list of all the men and women who have advised me
and they have encouraged me, just as they have shaped the ministry I have carried out, I would fill
many pages with them. However, we should include: Barbara Boyd, Richard
Lovelace, Roger Nicole, Elisabeth Elliot, Kennedy Smartt, Harvice Conn, Jack Miller
and as always, to my wife, Kathy.
To everyone, my sincerest gratitude.

Tim Keller

June of the year 2008
                                               Notes
Introduction
The sermon has been published under the title 'Sharing the welcome that was given the '
father," in its volumePreaching Christ from All of Scripture(Crossway, 2003). By
For three years, I co-taught a course on preaching with Dr. Clowney. During
the time I spent with him about how I had built upon his foundations and
what I believed became the radical implications of this parable said
by Jesus. Dr. Clowney was asserting himself very well in this material, which
find today in this book.

I have consulted many other comments and studies about chapter 15 of the
Gospel according to Saint Luke, although I wish to acknowledge that I have a special debt to the
work written by Kenneth E. Bailey,Finding the Lost Cultural Keys to Luke15 (Ed.
Concordia, 1992) for many of the observations within the background
historical and cultural aspects that I used in this volume.

Chapter 1: The People Around Jesus

3. J.R.R. Tolkien,The Two Towers(Harper Collins, 2004), p.577.
This dialogue is based on an illustration made from a sermon given by Richard Lucas,
in the Anglican Church of St. Helen's Bishopsgate, in London, United Kingdom.

Chapter 3: Redefining Sin

5. The script of Witness, by Earl W. Wallace and William Kelley can be found in
Invalid URL format, unable to translate.f access allowed on the 31st of
December 2007.
6. Flannery O’Connor, Wise Blood: A Novel (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1990), p.22.
7. The script of the play created by Peter Shaffer, Amadeus, can be found at http://
www.imsdb.com/scripts/Amadeus.html (access allowed on December 30, 2007).
In Luke chapter 18, Jesus tells the parable of a tax collector (who
he collaborated with the Roman forces that occupied Israel) and with a Pharisee. The latter is
very morally upright but very self-sufficient, while the collector of
Taxes is morally a failure but is regretful. Jesus concludes: "I tell you
that this one, and not that one, returned to his house justified before God. For everyone who exalts himself
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.” (Luke 18:14)
"I have not come to"
to call the righteous but sinners to repentance                  ”
                                                                     .
Chapter 6: Redefining Hope

11. John Steinbeck:East of Eden(Viking, 1952), p.3.

John Knowles:A Separate PeaceBoth are cited in the
works of C. Plantinga: Engaging God’s World: A Christian Vision of Faith, Learning,
and Living(Eerdmans, 2002), p.3. I owe my reflection on spiritual nostalgia.
to the entire first chapter of the work written by Plantinga.
C.S. Lewis:The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses(Simon and Schuster, 1996)
pp. 28-29, 35-36.

Chapter 7: Father's Party

13. W. Kimnach, K. Minkema, D. Sweeney, Eds:The Sermons of Jonathan Edwards: A
Reader(Yale, 1999), pp.127-128.
14. Martin Luther:A Commentary on St. Paul’s Epistle to GalatiansJames Clarke
1953), p.101.
15. C.S. Lewis:The Four Loves   (Harcourt, 1960), pp. 61-62.
Timothy Keller was born and raised in Pennsylvania, and was educated at the University of
Bucknell, at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and at the Theological Seminary of
Westminster. He began his pastoral ministry in Hopewell, Virginia. Then, in 1989,
he started in Manhattan with his wife, Kathy, and their three children, the Church
Presbyterian El Redentor. Currently, this church has nearly six thousand attendees in the
five services that are provided, a series of daughter churches, and is planting churches in
big cities around the world.
.




"Characters of the drama" in Latin. N of the T.
