ZONDERVAN
Disappointment with God
Copyright © 1988 by Philip Yancey
First paperback edition 1992
This title is also available as a Zondervan ebook product.
Visit www.zondervan.com/ebooks for more information.
This title is also available in a Zondervan audio edition.
Visit www.zondervan.fm.
Requests for information should be addressed to:
Zondervan, 3900 Sparks Dr. SE, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49546
ISBN 978-0-310-28587-8 (softcover)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Yancey, Philip.
Disappointment with God / Philip Yancey.
p.cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-0-310-51781-8
1. God—Knowableness. 2. Theodicy. 3. Faith. I. Title.
BT102.Y36 1988
217.7

88-20848

All Scripture quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are taken from the Holy Bible, New
International Version®, NIV®. Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984, 2011 by Biblica, Inc.® Used by
permission. All rights reserved.
Any Internet addresses (websites, blogs, etc.) and telephone numbers in this book are
offered as a resource. They are not intended in any way to be or imply an endorsement
by Zondervan, nor does Zondervan vouch for the content of these sites and numbers
for the life of this book.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy,
recording, or any other—except for brief quotations in printed reviews, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
Cover photography: Shutterstock®
First printing August 2015 / Printed in the United States of America

9780310517818_corr083115.pdf 4

8/31/15 9:27 AM

CONTENTS

R
Preface

9

BOOK I: GOD WITHIN THE SHADOWS
Part One—Hearing the Silence
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

A Fatal Error
Up in Smoke
The Questions No One Asks Aloud
What If
The Source

21
29
39
47
55

Part Two—Making Contact: The Father
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Risky Business
The Parent
Unfiltered Sunlight
One Shining Moment
Fire and the Word
Wounded Lover
Too Good to Be True

61
67
73
81
87
93
101

Part Three—Drawing Closer: The Son
13. The Descent
14. Great Expectations

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 7

107
113

8/28/15 1:05 PM

15. Divine Shyness
16. The Postponed Miracle
17. Progress

121
129
135

Part Four—Turning It Over: The Spirit
18. The Transfer
19. Changes in the Wind
20. The Culmination

145
151
159

BOOK II: SEEING IN THE DARK
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Interrupted
The Only Problem
A Role in the Cosmos
Is God Unfair?
Why God Doesn’t Explain
Is God Silent?
Why God Doesn’t Intervene
Is God Hidden?
Why Job Died Happy
Two Wagers, Two Parables

171
179
187
197
211
227
241
259
269
279

Discussion Guide
Thanks
Bibliography

289
302
303

9780310517818_corr083115c_redu.pdf 8

8/31/15 10:38 AM

Awake, O Lord! Why do you sleep?
Rouse yourself! Do not reject us forever.
Why do you hide your face?
PSALM 44:23-24

R

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 15

8/28/15 1:05 PM

BOOK I

GOD WITHIN
THE SHADOWS
You do not have to sit outside in the dark.
If, however, you want to look at the stars,
you will find that darkness is required.
The stars neither require it nor demand it.
ANNIE DILLARD

R

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 17

8/28/15 1:05 PM

PART ONE

Hearing the
Silence

R

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 19

8/28/15 1:05 PM

CHAPTER 1

A FATAL ERROR

R

E

ver since my book Where Is God When It Hurts? was published,
I have received letters from people disappointed with God.
A young mother wrote that her joy had turned to bitterness and
grief when she delivered a daughter with spina bifida, a birth defect
that leaves the spinal cord exposed. In page after page of tiny, spidery script she recounted how medical bills had soaked up the family savings and how her marriage had cracked apart as her husband
came to resent all the time she devoted to their sick child. As her life
crumbled around her, she was beginning to doubt what she had once
believed about a loving God. Did I have any advice?
A homosexual spilled out his story gradually, in a succession
of letters. For more than a decade he had sought a “cure” for his
sexual orientation, trying charismatic healing services, Christian support groups, and chemical treatment. He even underwent a form of
aversion therapy in which psychologists applied electrical shocks to
his genitals when he responded to erotic photos of men. Nothing
worked. Finally he surrendered to a life of gay promiscuity. He still
writes me occasionally. He insists that he wants to follow God but
feels disqualified because of his peculiar curse.
21

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 21

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

A young woman wrote, with some embarrassment, about her
ongoing depression. She has no reason to be depressed, she said. She
is healthy, earns a good salary, and has a stable family background.
Yet most days when she wakes up she cannot think of a single reason
to go on living. She no longer cares about life or God, and when she
prays, she wonders if anyone is really listening.
These and other letters I have received over the years all lead up
to the same basic question, phrased in different ways. It goes something like this: “Your book is about physical pain. But what about
pain like mine? Where is God when I hurt emotionally? What does
the Bible say about that?” I answer the letters as best I can, sadly
conscious of the inadequacy of words on paper. Can a word, any
word, ever heal a wound? And I must confess that after reading these
anguished accounts I ask the very same questions. Where is God in
our emotional pain? Why does he so often disappoint us?

R
Disappointment with God does not come only in dramatic
circumstances. For me, it also edges unexpectedly into the mundaneness of everyday life. I remember one night last winter, a cold,
raw Chicago night. The wind was howling, and sleet slanted out of
the skies, coating the streets with darkly shining ice. That night my
car stalled in a rather ominous neighborhood. As I raised the hood
and hunched over the engine, the sleet stinging my back like tiny
pebbles, I prayed over and over, Please help me get this car started.
No amount of fiddling with wires and tubes and cables would
start the car, and so I spent the next hour in a dilapidated diner waiting for a tow truck. Sitting on a plastic chair, my drenched clothes
forming a widening pool of water around me, I wondered what God
22

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 22

8/28/15 1:05 PM

A F at al Er ro r

thought about my plight. I would miss a scheduled meeting that
night and would probably waste many hours over the next few days
trying to wring fair, honest work out of a service station set up to
prey upon stranded motorists. Did God even care about my frustration or the waste of energy and money?
Like the woman embarrassed over her depression, I feel ashamed
even to mention such an unanswered prayer. It seems petty and selfish, maybe even stupid, to pray for a car to start. But I have found
that petty disappointments tend to accumulate over time, undermining my faith with a lava flow of doubt. I start to wonder whether
God cares about everyday details — about me. I am tempted to pray
less often, having concluded in advance that it won’t matter. Or will
it? My emotions and my faith waver. Once those doubts seep in, I
am even less prepared for times of major crisis. A neighbor is dying
of cancer; I pray diligently for her. But even as I pray, I wonder. Can
God be trusted? If so many small prayers go unanswered, what about
the big ones?
One morning in a motel room I switched on the television and the
square, jowly face of a well-known evangelist filled the screen. “I’m mad
at God!” he said, glowering. It was a remarkable confession from a man
who had built his career around the notion of “seed faith” and absolute
confidence in God’s personal concern. But God had let him down, he
said, and went on to explain. God had commanded him to build a large
ministry complex; and yet the project proved to be a financial disaster,
forcing him to sell off properties and cut back programs. He had kept
his part of the bargain, but God had not.
A few weeks later I again saw the evangelist on television, this
time exuding faith and optimism. He leaned toward the camera, his
craggy face splitting into a big grin, and jabbed his finger toward
a million viewers. “Something good is going to happen to you this
23

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 23

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

week!” he said, coaxing three syllables out of the word “good.” He
was at his salesman best, utterly convincing. A few days later, however, I heard on the news that his son had committed suicide. I could
not help wondering what the evangelist said to God in his prayers
that fateful week.
Such struggles seem almost to mock the triumphant slogans
about God’s love and personal concern that I often hear in Christian
churches. Yet no one is immune to the downward spiral of disappointment. It happens to people like the televangelist and to people
like the letter writers, and it happens to ordinary Christians: first
comes disappointment, then a seed of doubt, then a response of
anger or betrayal. We begin to question whether God is trustworthy,
whether we can really stake our lives on him.

R
I have been thinking about this topic of disappointment with
God for a long time, but I hesitated to write about it for two reasons.
First, I knew I would have to confront questions that have no easy
answers — that may, in fact, have no answers. And second, I did not
want to write a book that would, by focusing on failure, dampen anyone’s faith.
Some Christians, I know, would reject the phrase “disappointment with God” out of hand. Such a notion is all wrong, they say.
Jesus promised that faith the size of a grain of mustard seed can move
mountains; that anything can happen if two or three gather together
in prayer. The Christian life is a life of victory and triumph. God
wants us happy, healthy, and prosperous, and any other state simply
indicates a lack of faith.
During a visit among people who believe exactly this, I finally
reached the decision to write this book. I was investigating the topic
24

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 24

8/28/15 1:05 PM

A F at al Er ro r

of physical healing for a magazine assignment, and the research led
me to a rather infamous church headquartered in rural Indiana. I
had learned of the church from a Chicago Tribune series and from a
special report on ABC’s Nightline program.
Members of this church believed that simple faith could heal
any disease and that to look elsewhere for help — for example, to
medical doctors — demonstrated a lack of faith in God. The Tribune articles told of parents who had looked on helplessly as their
children fought losing battles with meningitis or pneumonia or a
common flu virus — diseases that easily could have been treated.
On a map of the United States, a Tribune artist had drawn tiny
tombstone symbols to mark where people had died after refusing
medical treatment in accordance with church teaching. There were
fifty-two tombstones in all.
According to the reports, pregnant women in that church died
in childbirth at a rate eight times the national average, and young
children were three times more likely to die. Yet the church was
growing and had established branches in nineteen states and five
foreign countries.
I visited the mother church in Indiana on a sweltering August
day. Heat waves shimmied off the asphalt roads, and parched brown
cornstalks drooped in the fields. The building sat unmarked in the
midst of one of those cornfields — huge, isolated, like a misplaced
barn. In the parking lot I had to talk my way past two ushers with
walkie-talkies; the church was nervous about publicity, especially
since former members had recently filed lawsuits.
I suppose I expected a sign of fanaticism during the service: a
swooning, hypnotic sermon delivered by a Jim Jones – type preacher.
I saw nothing like that. For ninety minutes, seven hundred of us sitting in a large semicircle sang hymns and studied the Bible.
25

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 25

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

I was among simple people. The women wore dresses or skirts,
no slacks, and used little makeup. The men, dressed in shirts and
ties, sat with their families and helped keep the children in line.
Children were far more conspicuous here than in most churches;
they were everywhere. Keeping quiet for ninety minutes stretches the
limits of a small child’s endurance, and I watched the parents try to
cope. Coloring books abounded. Mothers played games with their
children’s fingers. Some had brought along a treasure trove of toys
in oversized pocketbooks.
If I had come looking for sensationalism, I went away disappointed. I had seen a slice of old-fashioned Americana where the
traditional family was still alive and well. Parents there loved their
children as much as any parents on earth.
And yet — the map with the tiny tombstones leaped to
mind — some of those same parents had sat by the bedsides of their
dying youngsters and done nothing. One father told the Tribune of his
prayer vigil as he watched his fifteen-month-old son battle a fever for
two weeks. The illness first caused deafness, then blindness. The pastor
of the church urged even more faith and persuaded the father not to call
a doctor. The next day the boy was dead. An autopsy revealed that he
had died from an easily treatable form of meningitis.
By and large, the members of the Indiana church do not blame
God for their miseries, or at least they do not admit to doing so.
Instead, they blame themselves for weak faith. Meanwhile, the tombstones multiply.
I went away from that Sunday service with a profound conviction that what we think about God and believe about God
matters — really matters — as much as anything in life matters. Those
people were not ogres or child-murderers, and yet several dozen of
their children had died because of an error (I believe) in theology.
26

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 26

8/28/15 1:05 PM

A F at al Er ro r

(Actually, the teaching of the Indiana church is not so different
from what I hear in many evangelical churches and on religious
television and radio; they simply apply the extravagant promises of
faith more consistently.)
Because of those sincere people in Indiana, along with the questioning people who had written to me, I decided to confront issues I
am sorely tempted to avoid. Thus, this book of theology. Not a technical book by any means, but a book about the nature of God and
why he sometimes acts in puzzling ways and sometimes does not act.
We dare not confine theology to seminary coffee shops where
professors and students play mental badminton. It affects all of us.
Some people lose their faith because of a sharp sense of disappointment with God. They expect God to act a certain way, and God “lets
them down.” Others may not lose their faith, but they too experience
a form of disappointment. They believe God will intervene, they
pray for a miracle, and their prayers come back unanswered. Fiftytwo times, at least, it happened that way in the Indiana church.

27

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 27

8/28/15 1:05 PM

CHAPTER 2

UP IN SMOKE

R

O

ne afternoon my phone rang and the caller identified himself
as a theology student at Wheaton College Graduate School.
“My name is Richard,” he said. “We haven’t met, but I feel a kinship
with you because of some of your writings. Do you have a minute?”
Richard proceeded to tell me about his life. He had become
a Christian as a university student when an InterVarsity worker
befriended him and introduced him to the faith. Yet Richard hardly
talked like a new Christian. Although he asked for my recommendations of Christian books, I found that he had already read each one
I mentioned. We had a pleasant, wandering conversation, and not
until the end of the call did I learn his real purpose in contacting me.
“I hate to bother you with this,” he said nervously. “I know
you’re probably busy, but there is one favor I’d like to ask. You see,
I wrote this paper on the Book of Job, and my professor told me I
should make a book out of it. Is there a chance you could take a look
and see what you think?”
I said yes, and the manuscript arrived within a few days. In truth,
I did not expect much. Graduate school papers do not normally make
29

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 29

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

compelling reading, and I doubted whether a relatively recent convert
could come up with fresh insights on the daunting Book of Job. But
I was wrong. The manuscript showed real promise, and over the next
few months Richard and I discussed by phone and mail how the
paper could be reshaped into book form.
A year later, with a finished manuscript and a signed contract
in hand, Richard called to ask if I would write a foreword. I had still
never met Richard, but I liked his enthusiasm, and he had written a
book I could easily endorse.
Six months passed, during which the book went through final
editing and revision. Then, shortly before its publication date, Richard called yet again. His voice sounded different: tense, edgy. To
my surprise he fended off questions about his forthcoming book. “I
need to see you, Philip,” he said. “There’s something I feel obligated
to tell you, and it should be in person. Could I come over some
afternoon this week?”

R
Hot, hazy rays of sunlight streamed into my third-floor apartment.
The open French doors had no screens, and flies buzzed in and out of
the room. Richard, dressed in white tennis shorts and a T-shirt, sat on a
couch across from me. Sweat glistened on his forehead. He had driven
for an hour in heavy Chicago traffic for this meeting, and he first gulped
down a glass of iced tea, trying to cool off.
Richard was lean and in good physical shape — “pure ectomorph,” as an aerobics instructor might say. A bony face and shortcropped hair gave him the severe, intense look of a God-haunted
monk. If body language speaks, his was voluble: his fists clenched
and unclenched, his tanned legs crossed and uncrossed, and his facial
muscles often tightened with tension.
30

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 30

8/28/15 1:05 PM

Up in Sm ok e

He skipped the small talk. “You’ve a right to be furious with
me,” he began. “I don’t blame you a bit if you feel snookered.”
I had no idea what he meant. “About what?”
“Well, it’s like this. The book you helped me with — it’s coming out next month, including your foreword. But the truth is, I
don’t believe what I wrote in that book anymore, and I feel I owe
you an explanation.”
He paused for a moment, and I watched the lines of tension
working in his jaw. “I hate God!” he suddenly blurted out. “No, I
don’t mean that. I don’t even believe in God.”
I said nothing. In fact, I said very little for the next three hours
as Richard told me his story, beginning with his parents’ breakup.
“I did everything I could to prevent the divorce,” he said. “I’d just
become a Christian at the university, and I was naive enough to
believe that God cared. I prayed nonstop day and night that they’d
get back together. I even dropped out of school for a while and went
home to try to salvage my family. I thought I was doing God’s will,
but I think I made everything worse. It was my first bitter experience
with unanswered prayer.
“I transferred to Wheaton College to learn more about the faith.
I figured I must be doing something wrong. At Wheaton I met people
who used phrases like ‘I spoke with God,’ and ‘the Lord told me.’ I
sometimes talked like that too, but never without a twitch of guilt. Did
the Lord really tell me anything? I never heard a voice or had any proof
of God I could see or touch. Yet I longed for that kind of closeness.
“Each time I faced a crucial decision I would read the Bible
and pray for guidance, like you’re supposed to. Whenever I felt right
about the decision, I would act on it. But, I swear, I ended up making the wrong choice every time. Just when I really thought I understood God’s will, then it would backfire on me.”
31

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 31

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

Street noises drifted in, and I could hear neighbors going up
and down the stairs, but these sounds did not distract Richard. He
kept talking, and I nodded occasionally, though I still did not understand the reason for his almost violent outburst against God. Lots of
families break up; lots of prayers go unanswered. What was the true
source of his molten rage?
He next told me about a job opportunity that had fallen
through. The employer reneged on a promise to him and hired
someone less deserving, leaving Richard with school debts and no
source of income. About the same time, Richard’s fiancée jilted
him. With no warning she broke off contact, refusing to give any
explanation for her abrupt change of heart. Sharon, the fiancée,
had played a key role in Richard’s spiritual growth, and as she left
him, he felt some of his faith leach away as well. They had often
prayed together about their future; now those prayers seemed like
cruel jokes.
Richard also had a series of physical problems, which only
added to his sense of helplessness and depression. Wounds of rejection, suffered when his parents had separated, seemed to reopen.
Had God merely been stringing him along — like Sharon? He visited
a pastor for advice. He felt like a drowning man, he said. He wanted
to trust God, but whenever he reached out he grasped a fistful of air.
Why should he keep believing in a God so apparently unconcerned
about his well-being?
The pastor was barely sympathetic, and Richard got the clear
impression that his own complaints did not measure up to the man’s
normal fare of broken marriages, cancer patients, alcoholics, and parents of wayward children. “When something straightens out with
your girlfriend, you’ll straighten out with God, too,” the pastor said
with a condescending smile.
32

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 32

8/28/15 1:05 PM

Up in Sm ok e

To Richard, the problems were anything but minor. He could
not understand why a loving heavenly Father would let him suffer
such disappointment. No earthly father would treat his child like
that. He continued going to church, but inside him a hard lump
of cynicism began forming, a tumor of doubt. The theology he
had learned in school and had written about in his book no longer
worked for him.
“It was odd,” Richard told me, “but the more anger I directed
at God, the more energy I seemed to gain. I realized that for the last
several years I had shrunken inside myself. Now, as I started doubting, and even hating the school and other Christians around me, I
felt myself coming back to life.”
One night something snapped. Richard attended a Sunday
evening church service where he heard the usual testimonies and
praise, but one report in particular rankled him. Earlier that week
a plane carrying nine missionaries had crashed in the Alaskan outback, killing all aboard. The pastor solemnly related the details
and then introduced a member of the church who had survived an
unrelated plane crash that same week. When the church member
finished describing his narrow escape, the congregation responded,
“Praise the Lord!”
“Lord, we thank you for bringing our brother to safety and for
having your guardian angels watch over him,” the pastor prayed.
“And please be with the families of those who died in Alaska.”
That prayer triggered revulsion, something like nausea, in Richard. You can’t have it both ways, he thought. If God gets credit
for the survivor, he should also get blamed for the casualties. Yet
churches never hear testimonies from the grievers. What would
the spouses of the dead missionaries say? Would they talk about a
“loving Father”?
33

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 33

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

Richard returned to his apartment greatly agitated. Everything
was coming to a head around one question: “Is God even there?” He
had not seen convincing evidence.

R
Richard interrupted his story at this point. The sun had strayed
behind a large building to the west, gauzily softening the room’s
shadows and streaks of light. Richard closed his eyes and chewed
on his lower lip. He pressed on his eyes with his thumbs, hard. He
seemed to be setting a mental picture, as if to get it just right.
“What happened next?” I asked, after a few minutes of silence.
“Was that the night you lost your faith?”
He nodded and resumed speaking, but in a subdued tone.
“I stayed up late that night, long after my neighbors had gone to
bed — I live on a quiet street in the suburbs — and it seemed like I
was alone in the world. I sensed something important was about to
happen. I was hurt. So many times God had let me down. I hated
God, and yet I was afraid too. I was a theology student, right? Maybe
God was there and I had it all wrong. How could I know? I went
back over my whole Christian experience, from the very beginning.
“I remembered the first flush of faith at the university. I was
young then, and vulnerable. Maybe I had just learned a few upbeat
phrases and talked myself into believing in ‘an abundant life.’ Maybe
I had been mimicking other people and living off their experiences.
Had I deluded myself about God?
“Still, I hesitated to cast aside all that I believed. I felt I had to
give God one last chance.
“I prayed that night as earnestly and sincerely as I knew how. I
prayed on my knees, and I prayed stretched out flat on the oak floor.
34

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 34

8/28/15 1:05 PM

Up in Sm ok e

‘God! Do you care?’ I prayed. ‘I don’t want to tell you how to run
your world, but please give me some sign that you’re really there!
That’s all I ask.’
“For four years I’d been straining for ‘a personal relationship
with God,’ as the phrase goes, and yet God had treated me worse
than any of my friends. Now everything narrowed down to one final
question: How can you have a personal relationship if you’re not
sure the other person even exists? With God, I could never be sure.
“I prayed for at least four hours. At times I felt foolish, at times
utterly sincere. I had the sensation of stepping off a ledge in the darkness with no idea where I might land. That was up to God.
“Finally, at four o’clock in the morning, I came to my senses.
Nothing had happened. God had not responded. Why continue torturing myself? Why not just forget God and get on with life, like
most of the rest of the world?
“Instantly I felt a sense of relief and freedom, like I had just
passed a final exam or gotten my first driver’s license. The struggle
was over. My life was my own.
“It seems silly now, but this is what I did next. I picked up my
Bible and a couple other Christian books and walked downstairs and
out the back door. I shut the door softly behind me, so as not to wake
anyone. In the backyard was a brick barbecue grill, and I piled the
books on it, sprayed them with lighter fluid, and struck a match. It
was a moonless night, and the flames danced high and bright. Bible
verses and bits of theology curled, blackened, then broke off in tiny
crumbs of ash and floated skyward. My faith was going up with them.
“I made another trip upstairs and brought down another armload of books. I did this maybe eight times over the next hour. Commentaries, seminary textbooks, the rough draft of my book on Job —
all of them went up in smoke. I might have burned every book I
35

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 35

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

owned if I hadn’t been interrupted by an angry fireman in a yellow
rain slicker who ran toward me, shouting, ‘What do you think you’re
doing!’ Someone had phoned in an alarm. I fumbled around for an
excuse and finally told him I was just burning trash.
“After the fireman had squirted some chemicals on my bonfire
and shoveled dirt over it, he let me go. I climbed the stairs and sank
into bed, smelling of smoke. It was almost dawn by then, and at
last I had peace. A great weight had lifted. I had been honest with
myself. Any pretense was gone, and I no longer felt the pressure
to believe what I could never be sure of. I felt converted — but
converted from God.”

R
I’m glad I don’t make my living as a professional counselor.
When I sit across from someone spilling his guts like Richard did,
I never know what to say. I said little that afternoon, and maybe
that was best. It would not have helped for me to find fault with the
“tests” Richard had devised for God.
He seemed especially concerned about the book on Job due out
within the next few weeks. The publisher knew about his change
of heart, he said, but the first edition was already on the presses. I
assured him my endorsement of the book still held. It was the content of the book I was endorsing, more than his personal attachment.
“Besides, I’ve certainly changed my mind about some things I’ve
written in the last ten years,” I told him.
Richard was exhausted after talking so long, but he seemed more
relaxed as he stood to leave. “Maybe all my problems started with my
study of Job,” he said. “I used to love Job — he wasn’t afraid to be
honest with God. He took God on. I guess the difference between
36

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 36

8/28/15 1:05 PM

Up in Sm ok e

us is what happened at the end. God came through for Job, after all
his pain. He didn’t come through for me.”
Dusk had fallen, and a photocell had already switched on the
stairway lights. As Richard shook my hand and disappeared down
the steps, I felt very sad. He was young and tanned and healthy.
Some would say he had no real reason to despair. But listening to
him, watching his hands clenching and the lines of tension in his
face, I had recognized at last the source of his rage.
Richard was feeling a pain as great as any that a human being
experiences: the pain of betrayal. The pain of a lover who wakes up
and suddenly realizes it’s all over. He had staked his life on God, and
God had let him down.

37

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 37

8/28/15 1:05 PM

CHAPTER 3

THE QUESTIONS
NO ONE ASKS ALOUD

R

S

ometimes the most important questions, those that float in vague
suspension for much of our lives, can crystallize in a single
moment. Richard’s visit provided such a moment for me. In one
respect his complaints — broken home, health problems, failed
romance, lost job — hardly ranked as world-class disappointments.
And yet that night by the barbecue grill he had, with theatrical finality, acted on the doubts that plague almost all of us. Does God really
care? If so, why won’t he reach down and fix the things that go
wrong — at least some of them?
Absorbed in his anger and pain, Richard had not given voice to
his doubts in a systematic way; he experienced them more as feelings
of betrayal than as matters of faith. As I brooded over our conversation, however, I kept returning to three large questions about God
that seemed to lurk just behind the thicket of his feelings. The longer
I pondered them, the more I realized that these questions are lodged
somewhere inside all of us. Yet few people ask them aloud, for they
seem at best impolite, at worst heretical.
39

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 39

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

Is God unfair? Richard had tried to follow God, but his life fell
apart anyway. He could not reconcile his miseries with the biblical
promises of rewards and happiness. And what about the people who
openly deny God yet prosper anyway? This is an old complaint, as
old as Job and the Psalms, but it remains a stumbling block to faith.
Is God silent? Three times, as he faced crucial choices in his
education, career, and romance, Richard begged God for clear direction. Each time he thought he had God’s will figured out, only to
have that choice lead to failure. “What kind of Father is he?” Richard
asked. “Does he enjoy watching me fall on my face? I was told that
God loves me and has a wonderful plan for my life. Fine. So why
doesn’t he tell me what that plan is?”
Is God hidden? This question, above all, obsessed Richard. It
seemed to him an irreducible minimum, a theological bottom line,
that God should somehow prove himself: “How can I have a relationship with a Person I’m not even sure exists?” Yet it seemed that
God deliberately hid himself, even from people who sought him out.
And when Richard’s late-night vigil provoked no response, he simply
gave up on God.
I thought about these three questions often on a subsequent
writing assignment in South America. In Peru, a missionary pilot
flew me to a small Shipibo Indian village. He landed the floatplane,
taxied to the riverbank, and guided me along a jungle trail to the
main “street” in town: a dirt path surrounded by a dozen huts built
on stilts and covered with palm-frond roofs. He had brought me
there to show me a thriving, forty-year-old church. But he also
showed me a granite marker just off the main path and told me the
story of the young missionary who had helped found that church.
When his six-month-old son died from a sudden onset of vomiting and diarrhea, the young missionary seemed to crack. He hewed
40

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 40

8/28/15 1:05 PM

T he Que s t ions No On e A s k s A l o u d

a marker by hand from local stone — the marker we were looking
at — buried the baby’s body, and planted a tree beside the grave. At
the hottest part of each day, when everyone else sought shade, the
missionary walked to the river and hauled back a jug of water for the
tree. Then he stood beside the grave, his shadow falling across it, as
if to shield it from the blazing equatorial sun. Sometimes he would
weep, sometimes pray, and sometimes just stand there with a vacant
gaze. His wife, the Indian church members, and other missionaries
all tried to comfort him, but to no avail.
Eventually, the missionary himself got sick. His mind wandered; he had constant diarrhea. He was flown to Lima, where doctors probed him for any sign of amoeba or other tropical organisms,
but found nothing. None of the drugs they tried were effective. They
diagnosed his problem as “hysterical diarrhea” and sent him and his
wife back to the United States.
As I stood beside the crumbling granite marker, which the
Indian women now used as a place to rest their water pots, I tried
to put myself in that young missionary’s place. I wondered what he
had prayed as he stood there in the noonday sun, and Richard’s three
questions kept coming to mind. My guide had said the man was
tormented by the question of unfairness. His baby had done nothing
wrong. The missionary had brought his family to serve God in the
jungle — was this their reward? He had also prayed for some sign of
God’s presence, or at least a word of comfort. But he felt none. As if
distrustful of God’s own sympathy, the missionary took on a form
of sympathetic suffering in his own body.
True atheists do not, I presume, feel disappointed in God.
They expect nothing and receive nothing. But those who commit
their lives to God, no matter what, instinctively expect something in
return. Are those expectations wrong?
41

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 41

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

R
I did not see my friend Richard for a long time. I prayed for him
regularly, but all my efforts to contact him proved futile. His phone
had been disconnected, and I heard he had moved out of the area.
His publisher eventually sent me a copy of his book on Job, and it
sat on my shelf as a potent warning against writing too hastily on
matters of faith.
Then one day, about three years later, I bumped into Richard
in downtown Chicago. He looked good: by putting on a little weight
and letting his hair grow a few inches longer, he had lost the haunted,
severe mien. He seemed glad to see me, and we scheduled a lunch.
“Last time I met with you, I guess I was in the pits,” he said
with a smile as he joined me in a Mexican restaurant a few days later.
“Life is treating me much better now.” He had a promising job and
had long since put the failed romance behind him.
Soon our conversation turned to God, and it quickly became
evident that Richard had not fully recovered. A thick scab of cynicism now covered the wounds, but he was as angry at God as ever.
The waitress poured a fresh cup of coffee, and Richard wrapped
both hands around the cup and stared at the dark, steaming liquid.
“I’ve gained some perspective on that crazy period,” he said. “I think
I’ve figured out what went wrong. I can tell you the exact hour and
minute I began doubting God, and it wasn’t at Wheaton or in my
room that night I stayed up praying.” He then related an incident
that had occurred very early in his Christian life.
“One thing bugged me from the very beginning: the notion of
faith. It seemed a black hole that could gobble up any honest question. I’d ask the InterVarsity leader about the problem of pain, and
he would spout something about faith. ‘Believe God whether you feel
42

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 42

8/28/15 1:05 PM

T he Que s t ions No On e A s k s A l o u d

like it or not,’ he’d say. ‘The feelings will follow.’ I faked it, but I can
now see that the feelings never followed. I was just going through the
motions.
“Even back then I was searching for hard evidence of God as
an alternative to faith. And one day I found it — on television, of all
places. While randomly flipping a dial, I came across a mass healing service being conducted by Kathryn Kuhlman. I watched for
a few minutes as she brought various people up on the stage and
interviewed them. Each one told an amazing story of supernatural
healing. Cancer, heart conditions, paralysis — it was like a medical
encyclopedia up there.
“As I watched Kuhlman’s program, my doubts gradually melted
away. At last I had found something real and tangible. Kuhlman
asked a musician to sing her favorite song, ‘He Touched Me.’ That’s
what I needed, I thought: a touch, a personal touch from God. She
held out that promise, and I lunged for it.
“Three weeks later when Kathryn Kuhlman came to a neighboring state, I skipped classes and traveled half a day to attend one
of her meetings. The atmosphere was unbelievably charged — soft
organ music in the background; the murmuring sound of people
praying aloud, some in strange tongues; and every few minutes a
happy interruption when someone would stand and claim, ‘I’m
healed!’
“One person especially made an impression, a man from Milwaukee who had been carried into the meeting on a stretcher. When
he walked — yes, walked — onstage, we all cheered wildly. He told
us he was a physician, and I was even more impressed. He had incurable lung cancer, he said, and was told he had six months to live. But
now, tonight, he believed God had healed him. He was walking for
the first time in months. He felt great. Praise God!
43

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 43

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

“I wrote down the man’s name and practically floated out of
that meeting. I had never known such certainty of faith before. My
search was over; I had seen proof of a living God in those people on
the stage. If he could work tangible miracles in them, then surely he
had something wonderful in store for me.
“I wanted contact with the man of faith I had seen at the meeting, so much so that exactly one week later I phoned Directory Assistance in Milwaukee and got the physician’s number. When I dialed
it, a woman answered the phone. ‘May I please speak to Dr. S_____,’
I said.
“Long silence. ‘Who are you?’ she said at last. I figured she was
just screening calls from patients or something. I gave my name and
told her I admired Dr. S_____ and had wanted to talk to him ever
since the Kathryn Kuhlman meeting. I had been very moved by his
story, I said.
“Another long silence. Then she spoke in a flat voice, pronouncing each word slowly. ‘My . . . husband . . . is . . . dead.’ Just that one
sentence, nothing more, and she hung up.
“I can’t tell you how that devastated me. I was wasted. I halfstaggered into the next room, where my sister was sitting. ‘Richard,
what’s wrong?’ she asked. ‘Are you all right?’
“No, I was not all right. But I couldn’t talk about it. I was
crying. My mother and sister tried to pry some explanation out of
me. But what could I tell them? For me, the certainty I had staked
my life on had died with that phone call. A flame had flared bright
for one fine, shining week and then gone dark, like a dying star.”
Richard stared into his coffee cup. Marimba music playing in
the background sounded tinny and jarringly loud. “I don’t quite
understand,” I said. “That happened long before you went to Wheaton and got a theology degree and wrote a book — ”
44

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 44

8/28/15 1:05 PM

T he Que s t ions No On e A s k s A l o u d

“Yeah, but it all started back then,” he interrupted. “Everything that followed — Wheaton, the book on Job, the Bible study
groups — was a grasping attempt to prove wrong what I should have
learned from that one phone call. Nobody’s out there, Philip. And
if by some chance God does exist, then he’s toying with us. Why
doesn’t he quit playing games and show himself?”

R
Richard soon changed the topic of conversation, and we spent
the rest of the lunch catching up on the past three years. He kept
insisting that he was happy. He may have been protesting too
strongly, but he did indeed seem more content.
Toward the end, as we were digging into our ice cream desserts, he brought up our last meeting, three years before. “You must
have thought I was half-crazy, charging in there and blurting out my
whole life story when I’d never even met you.”
“Not at all,” I said. “In a strange sort of way, I’ve never been
able to get that conversation out of my mind. Actually, your complaints against God helped me better understand my own.”
I then told Richard about the three questions. After I had
explained them, I asked if they summed up his complaints
against God.
“Well, my doubt was more like a feeling — I felt jilted, like God
had strung me along just to watch me fall. But you’re right, as I think
about it; those questions were behind my feelings. God was certainly
unfair. And he always seemed hidden, and silent. Yeah, that’s it.
That’s it exactly!” he said.
“Why on earth doesn’t God answer those questions!” Richard
had raised his voice and was waving his arms like a politician — like
45

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 45

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

an evangelist. Fortunately, the restaurant had emptied. “If only God
answered those questions — if only he answered one of them. If, say,
he would just speak aloud one time so that everyone could hear,
then I would believe. Probably the whole world would believe. Why
doesn’t he?”

46

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 46

8/28/15 1:05 PM

CHAPTER 4

WHAT IF

R

I

f only,” Richard had said. If only God solved those three problems, then faith would flourish like flowers in springtime.
Wouldn’t it?
The same year I met Richard in the Mexican restaurant, I happened to be studying the books of Exodus and Numbers. And even
though Richard’s questions were still buzzing about in my mind, it
took a while for me to notice a curious parallel. Then one day it suddenly jumped out from the page: Exodus described the very world
Richard wanted! It showed God stepping into human history almost
daily. He acted with utter fairness and spoke so that everyone could
hear. Behold, he even made himself visible!
The contrast between the days of the Israelites and our days, the
twentieth century, got me thinking about how God runs the world,
and I went back to the three questions. If God has the power to act
fairly, speak audibly, and appear visibly, why, then, does he seem so
reluctant to intervene today? Perhaps the record of the Israelites in
the wilderness contained a clue.

47

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 47

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

Question: Is God unfair? Why doesn’t he consistently punish evil
people and reward good people? Why do awful things happen to people
good and bad, with no discernible pattern?
Imagine a world designed so that we experience a mild jolt of
pain with every sin and a tickle of pleasure with every act of virtue.
Imagine a world in which every errant doctrine attracts a lightning
bolt, while every repetition of the Apostles’ Creed stimulates our
brains to produce an endorphin of pleasure.
The Old Testament records a “behavior modification” experiment almost that blatant: God’s covenant with the Israelites. In the
Sinai Desert, God resolved to reward and punish his people with
strict, legislated fairness. He signed the guarantee with his own hand,
making it dependent on the one condition that the Israelites had to
follow the laws he laid down. He then had Moses outline the terms
of this guarantee to the people:
Results of Obedience

Results of Disobedience

Prosperous cities and rural areas

Violence, crime, and poverty
everywhere

No sterility among men,
women, or livestock

Infertility among people and
livestock

Assured success in farming

Crop failure; locusts and worms

Dependable weather
conditions

Scorching heat, drought,
blight, and mildew

Guaranteed military victories

Domination by other nations

Total immunity to diseases

Fever and inflammation;
madness, blindness,
confusion of mind

48

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 48

8/28/15 1:05 PM

W hat I f

If they were obedient, Moses said, God would set them “high
above all the nations on earth”; they would “always be at the top,
never at the bottom.” In effect, the Israelites were promised protection from virtually every kind of human misery and disappointment.
On the other hand, if they disobeyed they would become “a thing
of horror and an object of scorn and ridicule to all the nations where
the Lord will drive you. . . . Because you did not serve the Lord your
God joyfully and gladly in the time of prosperity, therefore in hunger
and thirst, in nakedness and dire poverty, you will serve the enemies
the Lord sends against you.”
I read on, scanning the books of Joshua and Judges to see the
results of this covenant based on a “fair” system of rewards and punishment. Within fifty years the Israelites had disintegrated into a state
of utter anarchy. Much of the rest of the Old Testament recounts the
dreary history of the predicted curses — not blessings — coming true.
Despite all the lavish benefits of the covenant, Israel failed to obey
God and meet its terms.
Years later when New Testament authors looked back on that
history, they did not hold up the covenant as an exemplary model
of God relating to his people with absolute consistency and fairness. Rather, they said the old covenant served as an object lesson,
demonstrating that human beings were incapable of fulfilling a
contract with God. It seemed clear to them that a new covenant
(“testament”) with God was needed, one based on forgiveness and
grace. And that is precisely why the “New Testament” exists.
Question: Is God silent? If he is so concerned about our doing his
will, why doesn’t he reveal that will more plainly?
Various people claim to hear the word of God today. Some of
them are crazy, like the wild man who on “God’s orders” attacked
Michelangelo’s Pietà with a hammer, or the political assassin who
49

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 49

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

claimed God told him to shoot the president. Others seem sincere
but misguided, like the six strangers who reported to author Joni
Eareckson that God had instructed them to marry her. Still others
seem to carry on the authentic tradition of the prophets and apostles,
delivering the word of God to his people. So then, how can we know
whether what we have heard is truly a word from God?
God simplified matters of guidance, I discovered, when the Israelites camped in the Sinai wilderness. Should we pack up our tent and
move today or stay put? For the answer, an inquisitive Israelite need
only glance at the cloud over the tabernacle. If the cloud moved, God
wanted his people to move. If it stayed, that meant stay. (You could
conveniently check God’s will around the clock; at night the cloud
glowed like a tower of fire.)
God set up other ways, like the casting of lots and the Urim
and Thummim, to directly communicate his will, but most issues
were pre-decided. He had spoken his will for the Israelites in a set
of rules, codified into 613 laws that covered the complete range of
behavior, from murder to boiling a young goat in its mother’s milk.
Few people complained about fuzzy guidance in those days.
But did a clear word from God increase the likelihood of obedience? Apparently not. “Do not go up and fight [the Amorites],”
said God, “because I will not be with you. You will be defeated
by your enemies.” The Israelites promptly went up and fought the
Amorites and were defeated by their enemies. They marched when
told to sit tight, fled in fear when told to march, fought when told
to declare peace, declared peace when told to fight. They made a
national pastime out of inventing ways to break the 613 commands.
Clear guidance became as much of an affront to that generation as
unclear guidance is to ours.
I also noticed a telling pattern in the Old Testament accounts: the
very clarity of God’s will had a stunting effect on the Israelites’ faith.
50

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 50

8/28/15 1:05 PM

W hat I f

Why pursue God when he had already revealed himself so clearly?
Why step out in faith when God had already guaranteed the results?
Why wrestle with the dilemma of conflicting choices when God had
already resolved the dilemma? In short, why should the Israelites act
like adults when they could act like children? And act like children
they did, grumbling against their leaders, cheating on the strict rules
governing manna, whining about every food or water shortage.
As I studied the story of the Israelites, I had second thoughts
about crystal-clear guidance. It may serve some purpose — it may, for
example, get a mob of just-freed slaves across a hostile desert — but it
does not seem to encourage spiritual development. In fact, for the Israelites it nearly eliminated the need for faith at all; clear guidance sucked
away freedom, making every choice a matter of obedience rather than
faith. And in forty years of wilderness wanderings, the Israelites flunked
the obedience test so badly that God was forced to start over with a new
generation.
Question: Is God hidden? Why doesn’t he simply show up sometime, visibly, and dumbfound the skeptics once and for all?
What the Soviet cosmonaut wanted when he looked for God in
the dark void outside his spacecraft window, what my friend Richard
wanted, alone in his room at two in the morning, is the hungering
desire of our age (for those who still hunger). We want proof, evidence, a personal appearance, so that the God we have heard about
becomes the God we see.
What we hunger for happened once. For a time God did show
up in person, and a man spoke to him face to face as he might speak
with a friend. They met together, God and Moses, in a tent pitched
just outside the Israelite camp. The rendezvous was no secret. Whenever Moses trudged over to the tent to talk with God, the whole camp
turned out to watch. A pillar of cloud, God’s visible presence, blocked
the entrance to the tent. No one except Moses knew what transpired
51

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 51

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

inside; no one wanted to know. The Israelites had learned to keep
their distance. “Speak to us yourself and we will listen,” they said
to Moses. “But do not have God speak to us or we will die.” After
each meeting Moses would emerge glowing like a space alien, and the
people turned their faces away until he covered himself with a veil.
There were few, if any, atheists in those days. No Israelites
wrote plays about waiting for a God who never arrived. They could
see clear evidence of God outside the tent of meeting or in the thick
storm clouds hovering around Mount Sinai. A skeptic need only
hike over to the trembling mountain and reach out a hand to touch
it, and his doubts would vanish — one second before he did.
And yet what happened during those days almost defies belief.
When Moses climbed the sacred mountain stormy with the signs of
God’s presence, those people who had lived through the ten plagues
of Egypt, who had crossed the Red Sea on dry ground, who had
drunk water from a rock, who were digesting the miracle of manna
in their stomachs at that moment — those same people got bored
or impatient or rebellious or jealous and apparently forgot all about
their God. By the time Moses descended from the mountain, they
were dancing like heathens around a golden calf.
God did not play hide-and-seek with the Israelites; they had
every proof of his existence you could ask for. But astonishingly — and
I could hardly believe this result, even as I read it — God’s directness
seemed to produce the very opposite of the desired effect. The Israelites responded not with worship and love, but with fear and open
rebellion. God’s visible presence did nothing to improve lasting faith.

R
I had distilled Richard’s complaints about God into three questions. But Exodus and Numbers taught me that quick solutions to
52

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 52

8/28/15 1:05 PM

W hat I f

those three questions may not solve the underlying problems of disappointment with God. The Israelites, though exposed to the bright,
unshaded light of God’s presence, were as fickle a people as have
ever lived. Ten different times on the melancholy pathless plains of
the Sinai they rose up against God. Even at the very border of the
Promised Land, with all its bounty stretching out before them, they
were still keening for the “good old days” of slavery in Egypt.
These dismal results may provide insight into why God does
not intervene more directly today. Some Christians long for a world
well-stocked with miracles and spectacular signs of God’s presence.
I hear wistful sermons on the parting of the Red Sea and the ten
plagues and the daily manna in the wilderness, as if the speakers
yearn for God to unleash his power like that today. But the followthe-dots journey of the Israelites should give us pause. Would a burst
of miracles nourish faith? Not the kind of faith God seems interested
in, evidently. The Israelites give ample proof that signs may only
addict us to signs, not to God.
True, the Israelites were a primitive people emerging out of
slavery. But the biblical accounts have a disturbingly familiar ring
to them. The Israelites tended to behave, in Frederick Buechner’s
phrase, “just like everybody else, only more so.”
I came away from my study of them both surprised and confused: surprised to learn how little difference it made in people’s lives
when three major reasons for disappointment with God — unfairness, silence, and hiddenness — were removed; confused by the questions stirred up about God’s actions on earth. Has he changed? Has
he pulled back, withdrawn?
As Richard sat in my living room telling me his story that first
time, he had looked up suddenly and said in a fierce voice, “God
doesn’t know what the HELL he’s doing with this world!” What is
53

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 53

8/28/15 1:05 PM

DI S A P P OI NT M ENT W IT H GO D

God doing? What is the human experiment all about? What does he
want from us, after all, and what can we expect from him?

R
Without somehow destroying me in the process, how could God reveal
himself in a way that would leave no room for doubt? If there were no
room for doubt, there would be no room for me.
FREDERICK BUECHNER

Bible references: Deuteronomy 9, 7, 28; Romans 3; Galatians 3; Exodus 28,
40; Deuteronomy 1 – 2; Exodus 19 – 20, 32 – 33; Deuteronomy 1.
54

9780310285878_disowgod_25th_SC.pdf 54

8/28/15 1:05 PM

Disappointment with God
Three Questions No One Asks Aloud
By Philip Yancey
Philip Yancey has a gift for articulating the knotty
issues of faith. In this 25th Anniversary edition of
Disappointment with God, Yancey poses three
questions that Christians wonder but seldom ask
aloud: Is God unfair? Is he silent? Is he hidden? This
insightful and deeply personal book points to the odd
disparity between our concept of God and the
realities of life. Why, if God is so hungry for
relationship with us, does he seem so distant? Why,
if he cares for us, do bad things happen? What can
we expect from him after all? Yancey answers these
questions with clarity, richness, and biblical
assurance. He takes us beyond the things that make
for disillusionment to a deeper faith, a certitude of
God's love, and a thirst to reach not just for what
God gives, but for who he is. Included in this
anniversary edition is a study guide with questions
about these perplexing questions of faith that the
author confronts.

Get Your Copy of Disappointment with God!

Learn More

