
 
 
 
 
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE 
 
 
ROMANS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY 
 
by 
 
BARRY E. HORNER 
 
 
 
 
 
  ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2001 
by 
Barry E. Horner 
North Brunswick, New Jersey 
All rights reserved 
 
Printed in The United States of America 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LL roads in the  
Bible are seen  
most clearly from 
Romans, and  
when the message  
of Romans gets  
into a man’s heart  
there is no telling 
what may happen. 
 
J. I. Packer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  iv 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
Chapter                                                                                                            
 
Introduction   
 
1.      1:1-7           Salutation in the Gospel    
 
2.    1:8-15         Introduction to the Gospel 
 
3.    1:16-17        Theme, the Gospel of the Righteousness of God 
 
4.    1:18-3:20     The Unrighteousness of Man, the Bad News 
 
5.     3:21-31        The Righteousness of God, the Good News 
 
6.     4:1-25         The Old Testament Confirmation of the Gospel 
 
7.      5:1-21         The Reign of Grace over the Reign of sin 
 
8.      6:1-23         The Reign of Grace and Sanctified Liberation 
 
9.    7:1-25         The Reign of Grace and the Law 
 
10.    8:1-39         The Reign of Grace through the Spirit of the Gospel 
 
11.    9:1-33         The Gospel and Israel’s Election 
 
12.  10:1-21        The Gospel and Israel’s Defection 
 
13.    11:1-36        The Gospel and Israel’s Salvation 
 
14.    12:1-15:33   The Gospel and its Responsibilities 
 
15.    16:1-24        Farewell Greetings in the Gospel 
 
16.    16:25-27      Farewell benediction in the Gospel 
 
Page
1
8
18
24
32
87
121
138
171
201
225
268
296
311
346
400
411
  v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
  Every Christian pastor ought to preach through Romans, and the
commentary that follows represents this pastor’s attempt to wrestle
with  this  magisterial  revelation  of  the  only  gospel  of  the  saving
grace  of  God.  Obviously  editing  has  led  to  the  addition  of  much
material that, while not being suitable for the preaching mode, yet
is helpful, indeed vital, for the discipline of preaching preparation. 
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE  
ROMANS 
 
The Gospel of the Righteousness of God 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A.  THE IMPORTANCE OF ROMANS 
 
The Epistle to the Romans, written by the Apostle Paul, is arguably the quintessential book 
of  the  whole  Bible  when  it  comes  to  discovering  the  Christian  gospel  in  its  most  clear, 
profound and soul-expanding expression. Therefore it is not surprising that the corridors of 
Christian church history are strewn with exultant and powerful testimonies to the glorious 
message of reigning grace that this Epistle so magnifies. Some examples are as follows.  
 
1.  Aurelius [Saint] Augustine of North Africa, that great victor over the man-centered and 
heretical doctrine of Pelagius during the early fifth century, was converted in 386 AD 
when he overheard a child sing in Latin, “Tolle, lege! tolle, lege!” meaning, “Take up 
and read! take up and read.” Depressed over his sinful lifestyle, he picked up a scroll of 
Romans where he “randomly” opened it to 13:13-14 and read, 
not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in  chambering  and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and 
envying.  But  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh,  to 
fulfill  the  lusts  thereof  (Rom.  13:13b-14).  No  further  would  I  read,  nor  had  I  any  need; 
instantly, at the end of this sentence, a clear light flooded my heart and all the darkness of 
doubt vanished away.
1
 
There and then Augustine believed and was genuinely converted with the result that the 
Christian church gained one of its most notable theologians. 
 
2.  Martin  Luther’s  quest  to  discover  “a  righteous  God”  eventually  found  its 
satisfaction in Romans. He explains:  
I greatly longed to understand Paul’s epistle to the Romans and nothing stood in 
the  way  but  that  one  expression,  ‘the  justice  of  God,’  because  I  took  it  to  mean 
that  justice  whereby  God  is  just  and  deals  justly  in  punishing  the  unjust.  .  .  . 
Therefore  I  did  not  love  a  just  and  angry  God,  but  rather  hated  and  murmured 
against him. . . . Night and day I pondered until I saw the connection between the 
justice of God and the statement that ‘the just shall live by his faith’ [Rom. 1:17]. 
Then  I  grasped  that  the  justice  of  God  is  that  righteousness  by  which  through 
grace and sheer mercy God justifies us through faith. Thereupon I felt myself to be 
reborn  and  to  have  gone  through  open  doors  into  paradise.  The  whole  of 
                                            
1
  Aurelius Augustine, Confessions, Book 8, Chapter 12. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  2 
Scripture took on a new meaning, and whereas the ‘justice of God’ had filled me 
with hate, now it became to me inexpressibly sweet in greater love. This passage 
of Paul became to me a gate to heaven.
2
  
Later in the preface to his commentary on Romans, which passage was instrumental in 
the conversion of John Wesley, Luther writes:  
This Epistle is in truth the chief part of the New Testament and the purest Gospel. 
It  would  be  quite  proper  for  a  Christian,  not  only  to  know  it  by  heart  word  for 
word, but also to study it daily, for it is the soul’s daily bread. It can never be read 
or meditated too much and too well. The more thoroughly it is treated, the more 
precious it becomes, and the better it tastes.
3
   
 
3.  John  Calvin  declared  that,  “when  one  gains  a  knowledge  of  this  Epistle,  he  has  an 
entrance  opened  to  him  to  all  the  most  hidden  treasures  of  Scripture.”
4
  In  the 
succeeding  Puritan  heirs  of  the  Genevan  expositor,  William  Haller  describes  how, 
“they  urged  the  people  to  base  their  understanding  of  the  word  of  God  upon  Paul’s 
epistle  to  the  Romans.  If  one  began  one’s  study  of  scripture  at  that  point,  William 
Perkins advised, and then went to the gospel of John, one had the key to the whole.”
5
  
 
4.  Martyn Lloyd-Jones has more recently commented: 
It  has  been  the  universal  opinion  in  the  Christian  church  throughout  the  centuries  that 
Romans  is  the  Epistle  above  all  which  deals  with  fundamentals,  and  if  you  look  at  the 
history  of  the  church  I  think  you  will  see  that  has  been  borne  out  time  and  time  again. 
There is a sense in which we can say quite truthfully that the epistle to the Romans has, 
possibly,  played  a  more  important  and  a  more  crucial  part  in  the  history  of  the  church 
than any other single book in the whole of the Bible.
6
  
 
5.  John Murray, in the preface of his superior commentary, makes the following requisite 
acknowledgment: 
The  epistle  to  the  Romans  is  God’s  Word.  Its  theme  is  the  gospel  of  his  grace.  And  the 
gospel bespeaks the marvels of his condescension and love. If we are not overwhelmed by 
the  glory  of  that  gospel  and  ushered  into  the  holy  of  holies  of  God’s  presence,  we  have 
missed the grand purpose of this sacred deposit. And it is only because the grace of God 
has put treasure in earthen vessels that we men have been given the task and privilege of 
undertaking exposition.
7
  
 
6.  Robert Horn, in his clear and helpful explanation of the doctrine of justification by 
faith,  published  under  the  title  of  God  Free!  gives  us  a  contemporary  and  very 
                                            
2
  Roland Bainton, Here I Stand, pp. 49-50. 
3
  Martin Luther, Preface to the Epistle to the Romans, p. 1. 
4
  John Calvin, Epistle to the Romans, p. xxix. 
5
  William Haller, The Rise of Puritanism, p. 87. He further quotes Thomas Draxe who said that, “The Epistle 
to the Romans . . . is  like to nothing less than paradise itself, enclosing ‘the Quintessence and perfection of 
saving Doctrine,’ and the eighth chapter . . . is like a conduit conveying the waters of life; rather it is the tree 
of life in the midst of the garden,” ibid. 
6
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans - An Exposition of Chapter 1, p. 3. 
7
  John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. xi. 
INTRODUCTION  3
relevant  illustration  of  the  power  of  Romans  to  challenge  this  modern  generation, 
in much the same way that Augustine and others have been challenged. He writes:  
We  have  to  come  to  terms  with  God.  We  may  not  like  the  thought,  but  this  is  the  root 
problem  of  living.  Sometimes  people  recognize  this  almost  in  spite  of  themselves.  This 
happened  recently  in  one  university.  The  Christian  Union  held  a  book  week,  selling  a 
particular  title  from  door  to  door  in  the  student  residences  and  also  on  four  bookstalls 
round the campus. Along with the book they distributed a free hand-out in tabloid form, 
the contents of which were simply Paul’s words in Romans (chapters 1 and 2) about the 
wrath of God and the nature and extent of human sin. 
Student  reaction  was  very  definite.  One  girl  came  up  to  a  bookstall  and  said  accusingly, 
‘You’re  making  us  all  feel  guilty!’  The  Gay  Society  took  sharp  exception  to  Paul’s  plain 
speaking.  Some  of  the  Student  Union  committee  tried  to  get  copies  banned  and  the 
Christian Union ejected. The student newspaper published irate letters. Why were people 
so incensed? Why should a 1,900-year-old letter provoke them so much? Christian Union 
members commented that it was not the ‘Smile, Jesus loves you’ approach that prompted 
these reactions. It was the truth about the basic relationship of God and man - the truths 
of wrath and sin and judgment.
8
 
 
 
B.  THE BACKGROUND TO ROMANS 
 
1.  The Historical Setting. 
 
a.  Authorship. 
 
Both  conservative  and  liberal  scholarship,  as  well  as  the  early  church  fathers, 
agree that the Apostle Paul is the author of Romans as is plainly declared in 1:1, 
though  16:22  indicates  that,  as  was  customary,  he  used  an  amanuensis  or  scribe 
named Tertius.  
 
b.  The place of Paul’s writing. 
 
Having  completed  a  tumultuous  and  fruitful  ministry  in  Ephesus  lasting  near 
three  years,  Paul  has  moved  to  Corinth  for  three  months  and  there  writes 
Romans,  approximately  three  years  before  his  eventual  arrival  in  Rome.  He 
composed  his  epistle  in  the  home  of  Gaius,  his  host  (16:22),  using  Tertius  as  an 
amanuensis,  16:22,  and  most  likely  Phoebe  for  the  purpose  of  hand  delivery 
(16:1-2). 
 
c.  The time of Paul’s writing. 
 
The aforementioned brief stay at Corinth, in the midst of Paul’s third missionary 
journey,  was  most  likely  during  the  spring  of  58  AD.  The  Apostle  is  desirous  of 
returning to Jerusalem and prefers that he would arrive there in time for the Feast 
of Pentecost (Acts 20:16). 
 
 
                                            
8
  Robert Horn, Go Free!, pp. 7-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  4 
d.  The destination of Paul’s writing. 
 
(1)  Evidently  the  church  at  Rome  had  been  established  for  some  time,  though 
the circumstances of its origin are unknown. The church that Paul addresses, 
or  at  least  one  of  its  assemblies,  meets  in  the  house  of  Prisca  [Priscilla]  and 
Aquila  (16:3-5),  who  previously  had  met  Paul  in  Corinth  and  then  traveled 
with him to Ephesus (Acts 18:1-3, 24-26). 
 
(2)  Although  the  Jews  had  been  expelled  from  Rome  during  the  reign  of 
Emperor  Claudius,  yet  at  the  accession  of  Nero  they  were  permitted  to 
return, about 54 AD. Acts 28:23-29 indicates a vocal Jewish community had 
resettled  in  Rome,  though  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  anti-Semitism  had 
receded  since,  “The  roster  of  ancient  writers  who  expressed  anti-Jewish 
feeling  reads  like  a  roster  for  a  second-semester  course  in  classics:  Cicero, 
Tacitus,  Martial,  Horace,  Juvenal,  Persius,  Dio  Cassius,  Marcus  Aurelius, 
Apuleius,  Ovid,  Petronius,  Pliny  the  Elder,  Plutarch,  Quintilian,  Seneca, 
Seutonius.”
9
 
 
(3)  While the constituency of the church that Paul addresses seems to include a 
considerable number of Jews ( 1:16; 2:1-29; 3:29-30; 4:11; 9:1-11:36; 16:1-
23),  yet  there  are  good  reasons  for  believing  that  this  Christian  assembly  at 
Rome  was  predominantly  Gentile.  First,  the  introduction,  as  would  be 
expected,  addresses  the  predominant  constituency,  namely,  “we  [who]  have 
received  grace  and  apostleship  to  bring  about  the  obedience  of  faith  among 
the  Gentiles  [emphasis  added]  for  His  name’s  sake,  among  whom  you  also 
[emphasis  added]  are  the  called  of  Jesus  Christ”  (1:5-6;  cf.  the  related 
inference,  1:13).  Second,  the  manner  in  which  Jewish  concerns  are  injected, 
in  an  adjunct,  though  none-the-less  significant,  way  (2:17-3:2;  7:1).  This  is 
particularly so with the distinctive Jewish emphasis of 9-11 that qualifies the 
universal  thrust  of  the  gospel  in  1-8.  Thus  Gentiles  are  the  primary 
addressees.  Third,  the  conclusion  (16:1-23)  addresses  various  church 
members and associates, of which approximately 80% have Gentile names.
10
  
 
2.  The social setting. 
 
While  the  architectural  splendor  of  Rome  is  proverbial,  along  with  its  patrician 
government  and  polytheism,  yet  a  broader  plebeian  perspective  is  necessary  for  us  to 
understand the profound concerns of the Apostle Paul as he writes his Epistle: 
Within  a  circuit  of  little  more  then  twelve  miles  more  than  two  millions  of  inhabitants 
were  crowded.  .  .  .  The  free  citizens  were  more  than  a  million:  .  .  .  the  vast  number  of 
these would be poor. . . . Yet were these pauper citizens proud of their citizenship, though 
many of them had no better sleeping-place for the night than the public porticoes or the 
vestibules of temples. They cared for nothing beyond bread for the day, the games of the 
Circus,  and  the  savage  delight  of  gladiatorial  shows.  Manufactures  and  trade  they 
regarded as the business of the slave and foreigner. The number of the slaves was perhaps 
about  a  million.  .  .  .  Every  kind  of  nationality  and  religion  found  its  representative  in 
                                            
9
  Mark Nanos, quoting J. Meagher, “As The Twig Was Bent,” The Mystery of Romans, p. 65.  
10
  Ibid., pp. 77-9. 
INTRODUCTION  5
Rome. . . . Rome was like London with all its miseries, vices, and follies exaggerated, and 
without Christianity.
11
 
It is significant that for all of its vaunted splendor and might in worldly terms, Romans 
does  not  contain  the  slightest  intimation  of  the  Apostle’s  admiration  for  any  of  the 
notable  features  of  the  imperial  city,  as  is  likewise  the  case  in  Acts  when  he  visited 
Athens (Acts 17:16).  
 
 
C.  THE PURPOSES OF ROMANS 
 
Whatever  the  peripheral  circumstances  may  have  been,  such  as  the  state  of  the  church  at 
Rome  and  the  role  of  the  Jews  in  that  congregation,  yet  it  seems  to  stand  out  with  the 
greatest clarity that Paul’s purpose in general was doctrinal with regard to many aspects of 
the  gospel.  In  1:11-15  he  passionately  desires  that  the  saints  “be  established”  or 
“strengthened”  through  his  gifted  ministry,  v.  11,  that  there  be  mutual  encouragement,  v. 
12, that spiritual fruitfulness be stimulated, v. 13, and that preeminently these ends might be 
produced through his eagerness, “to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome,” v. 15. 
Note  that  Paul  desires  to  “evangelize”  true  believers,  that  is  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
converted  here.
12
  The  whole  of  Romans  is  an  eloquent  testimony  to  the  Apostle’s  primary 
desire  that  Christians  in  Rome  should  grow  in  their  understanding  and  reflection  of  the 
gospel.  It  may  be  that  the  lack  of  problems  at  Rome,  which  characterized  the  church  at 
Corinth,  enabled  him  to  present  more  mature  doctrine  in  accord  with  his  assessment  that, 
“the report of your obedience has reached to all; therefore I am rejoicing over you.” 16:19. 
A summary of Paul’s gospel purposes is as follows:  
 
1.  Romans is designed to edify believers with an expanded understanding of the gospel. 
 
a.  In the realm of sin’s exceeding sinfulness. 
 
b.  In the realm of justification through faith. 
 
c.  In the realm of vital identification with Jesus Christ. 
 
d.  In the realm of the reign of grace in contrast with the law. 
 
e.  In the realm of sanctification through walking in the Spirit. 
 
f.  In the realm of loving relationships in local church life. 
 
2.  Romans  is  designed  to  stimulate  assurance  with  an  expanded  understanding  of  the 
gospel. 
 
3.  Romans is designed to explain the integral relationship of Jew and Gentile with regard 
to the gospel. 
                                            
11
  Conybeare and Howson, The Life and Epistles of Paul, p. 737. 
12
  “[I]t is more natural to take ‘you’ to refer to Roman Christians; in this case, ‘preach the gospel’ will refer to 
the  ongoing  work  of  teaching  and  discipleship  that  builds  on  initial  evangelization.”  Douglas  J.  Moo,  The 
Epistle to the Romans, p. 65. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  6 
4.  Romans is designed to stimulate practical Christian living as a consequence of faith in 
the gospel. 
 
 
D.  THE KEY WORD IN ROMANS - RIGHTEOUSNESS 
 
1.  The word “righteousness,” dikaiosÚnh, dikaiosune¯ , is Paul’s key gospel term, “the 
dominating  theme  of  this  epistle,”
13
  not  love,  as  a  consideration  of  1:17;  3:21-22; 
4:6,  11,  13;  5:17,  18,  21;  6:13-20;  8:3-4,  10;  9:30-31;  10:3-10;  14:17  amply 
indicates.  The  cognates  “justice,”  d…kh,  dike¯ ,  and  “justification,”  dika…wsij,   
dikaio¯ sis,  likewise  reflect  the  fundamental  meaning  of  moral  straightness  or 
rightness,  whether  essential,  reflected,  demanded,  provided,  or  vindicated,  that  in 
both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  is  chiefly  sourced  in  the  holy  or  righteous 
character of God. 
 
2.  Righteousness as an Old Testament term. 
 
a.  God is righteous, that is morally, ethically straight (Ezra 9:15; Ps. 7:9; 119:138-8, 
142; cf. John 17:11, 25). Righteousness is the positive aspect of God’s holiness (Is. 
6:3). 
 
b.  God demands righteousness, that is he requires that man be righteous in both his 
being and doing even as God is righteous (Deut. 7:9; Ps. 4:5). 
 
c.  God  saves  with  righteousness,  that  is  he  maintains  holy  moral  consistency  in  the 
gracious  saving  of  sinners  (Isa.  45:8,  20-25;  46:12-13;  51:5-8;  61:1-3,  10-11). 
Thus Messiah is a righteous or just Savior (Zech. 9:9).  
 
d.  God  sanctifies  unto  righteousness,  that  is  he  communicates  or  imparts 
righteousness  unto  his  children  to  whom  righteousness  has  been  gratuitously 
imputed, like a cloak (Isa. 61:10-11). 
 
3.  Righteousness as a New Testament term for the gospel. 
 
a.  The gospel is the gift of righteousness from a righteous God (Rom. 3:21-24; 4:5; 
5:17, 21) to unrighteous man (Rom. 1:18, 29; 2:8). 
 
b.  The  gospel  is  the  gift  of  righteousness  to  the  unrighteous  that  vindicates  and 
justifies a righteous God (Rom. 3:25-26). 
 
c.  The  gospel  is  the  gift  of  righteousness  to  the  unrighteous  that  is  productive  of  a 
righteous lifestyle (Rom. 6:13, 18; I John 2:29; 3:7; 
 
d.  Illustration. Nicolaus von Zinzendorf’s wonderful hymn well expresses the love of 
Paul for God’s saving righteousness. 
 
                                            
13
  C. K. Barrett, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 29. 
INTRODUCTION  7
Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness, 
My beauty are, my glorious dress; 
Midst flaming worlds, in these arrayed, 
With joy shall I lift up my head. 
O let the dead now hear Thy voice, 
Now bid Thy banished ones rejoice, 
Their beauty this, their glorious dress, 
Jesus, the Lord our righteousness. 
 
 
E.  SEVEN IMPORTANT GOSPEL PRINCIPLES 
 
1.  The gospel is primarily about God, not man. Certainly the gospel is for man, but at its 
heart,  the  gospel  is  good  news  about  the  being  and  doing  of  God  (Rom.  3:21;  I  Cor. 
1:30; Eph. 2:4-5). 
 
2.  The  gospel  is  first  of  all  a  moral  rather  than  a  relational  matter  (Is.  59:2).  The  moral 
chasm  of  alienation  between  God  as  holy  and  man  as  unholy  is  a  result  of  moral 
conflict; when this gulf is bridged by means of the gospel of the righteousness of God, 
then a true relationship is established. Thus a sinner must be right with God before he 
can be reconciled to God. 
 
3.  The bad news is essentially about man’s unrighteousness and ungodliness, his thorough 
pollution  before  a  righteous  God  on  a  vertical  level  (Rom.  3:9-18),  not  his  tarnished 
self-image, his social imperfection, his relative righteousness on a mere horizontal level. 
 
4.  God’s  grace  freely  offered  is  yet  righteous  grace;  His  salvation  is  righteous;  He,  being 
absolutely righteous, saves with integrity (Rom. 3:36; I John 1:9) by means of a gospel 
of righteousness. 
 
5.  God’s  grace  is  sovereign  and  dynamic;  it  energizes,  motivates,  preserves,  and 
triumphantly  reigns  over  the  plague  of  sin  (Rom.  5:17,  21);  such  a  gospel  of  grace  is 
the ground of Christian sanctification. 
 
6.  Faith is non-meritorious, self-renouncing linkage with the God of the Bible who alone 
is the saving hope of the believer. Hence the transitive nature of faith, not being able to 
stand  alone,  must  be  gauged  as  true  faith  according  the  character  of  its  object  (Rom. 
3:22; 4:13). 
 
7.  The  grasp  of  the  doctrine  of  Romans  1-11  is  only  proven  to  be  genuine  when  the 
expectations of Romans 12-16 are demonstrable, especially 12:1-21; 13:8-15:6, within 
the perimeter of local church life. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
ROMANS 1:1-7 - SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL 
 
 
OT  only  is  this  salutation  the  longest  in  Paul’s  epistles,  but  also  it  is  the  most  evangelistic, 
that  is  gospel-focused,  and  considerably  more  so  than  Galatians.  There  is  good  reason  for 
this  emphasis  since  it  is  immediately  evident  that  the  Apostle’s  passion  is  for  the  Christians  at 
Rome to be edified by the gospel. It is for this reason that Luther was so insistent that Christians 
should be constantly immersed in this peerless, heartfelt composition, since he himself had been 
so personally blessed by such saturation. Thus “[This] letter of Paul . . . is like a stream that flows 
from Paradise and is like the Nile, which inundates all of Egypt. But this inundation must have its 
source  somewhere.  Thus  the  flood  which  the  Lord  creates  through  the  apostle  Paul  covers  the 
whole world and all people.”
1
 
Yet  to  take  Luther’s  illustration  further,  it  might  be  said  that  this  gospel  prologue  is  best 
represented  by  a  gushing  spring  rather  than  a  river.  B.  B.  Warfield  points  out  that  here  Paul’s 
tangenital style is plainly indicated.  
[H]e no sooner mentions the Gospel than off he goes on a tangent to describe it. . . . No sooner does 
he mention Christ than off he goes again on a tangent to describe Christ. Thus it comes about that 
this  passage,  formally  only  the  Address  of  the  Epistle,  becomes  actually  a  great  Christological 
deliverance,  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  our  knowledge  of  Paul’s  conception  of  Christ.  It  presents 
itself to our view like one of those nests of Chinese boxes; the outer encasement is the Address of the 
Epistle;  within  that  fits  neatly  Paul’s  justification  of  his  addressing  the  Romans  as  an  authoritative 
teacher of the Gospel; within that a description of  the Gospel committed to him; and within that a 
great declaration of who and what Jesus Christ is, as the contents of this Gospel.
2
 
 
 
A.  PAUL, THE APOSTLE OF GOD’S GOSPEL, V. 1 
 
In  all  thirteen  of  the  Apostle’s  epistles,  the  first  word  is  “Paul,”  Paàloj,  Paulos,  a  Latin 
surname  meaning  “little,”  perhaps  reflecting  his  conviction  that  he  was  “the  least  of  the 
apostles” (I Cor. 15:9). In addition, this Gentile name may have replaced the Jewish “Saul,” 
following conversion (Acts 13:9), for quite practical missionary reasons. 
 
1.  His commitment. 
 
Paul perceives himself to be a “bond-servant of Christ Jesus.” This is his estimate as a 
man  who,  having  known  the  heights  of  scholastic  achievement  and  religious 
sophistication,  has  been  subdued  even  to  the  dust  of  the  Damascus  road.  Here,  says 
Luther,  
[b]oth majesty and humility are comprehended in this word: Humility insofar as he does 
not  appoint  himself  lord  and  founder,  as  is  the  way  of  tyrants  and  of  the  proud,  who 
abuse their power in such a way that they think of nothing but that they have power, as if 
their power had its origin in themselves and as if they had not received it from someone  
 
                                              
1
  Martin Luther, Works, 25, p. 156. 
2
  Benjamin Breckrinridge Warfield, The Person and Work of Christ, pp. 73-74. 
N 
SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL  9
else.  Majesty,  however,  is  implied  when  he  rapturously  boasts  that  he  is  the  servant  of 
such a great Lord.
3
 
 
2.  His calling. 
 
In  most  of  his  epistles  Paul  is  careful  to  qualify  his  apostleship  using  such  terms  as 
“through  Jesus  Christ,”  or  by  means  of  the  “  will  of  God  “  or  “commandment  of 
God.”  Here  he  is “called”  as  an  apostle, ¢pÒstoloj,  apostolos,  simply  meaning  “sent 
one,”  which  term  in  16:7  and  Philippians  2:25  most  likely  refers  to  esteemed 
messengers. But for Paul, his calling has come directly from the Son of God (Gal. 1:1) 
and  not  mere  men,  and  as  such  he  is  under  constraint  to  authoritatively  speak  as 
pleasing  God  (II  Cor.  2:17;  I  Thess,  2:4)  because  a  sacred  stewardship  has  been 
entrusted to him (Acts 9:15-16; I Cor. 9:15-16). Paul’s vocation is a “course” or “race” 
set  before  him  (Acts  20:24;  II  Tim.  4:7).  As  a  “called  apostle,”  he  did  not  “prove 
disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision”  (Acts  26:19).  He  belongs  to  that  special  band  of 
foundational  stones  in  the  church  of  Jesus  Christ  that  abutted,  through  personal 
contact (Gal. 1:11-12; I Cor. 11:23), next to the Chief Corner Stone (Eph. 2:20).  
 
3.  His commission. 
 
With  regard  to  the  appointment  of  the  great  men  of  God  in  the  Bible,  such  as  with 
Abraham, Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Amos, etc., without 
exception they were subject to a sense of strong divine constraint, even coercion as in 
the case of Saul (Acts 26:14; Gal. 1:15), rather than mere solicitation as a volunteer. So 
Paul has an overwhelming sense of consecration, except that he constantly reminds us, 
as here, that it was God who did the setting apart, and not himself. 
 
a.  It is sacred. 
 
He  has  been  “set  apart”  or  “separated”  for  a  task  that  far  transcends  in 
importance  the  responsibilities  of  Roman  senators  and  Caesars.  The  root  of 
¢for…zw,  aphorizo¯ ,  means  “to  draw  a  line  around,”  so  that  Christians  are  to  be 
separate from unbelievers and paganism (Acts 19:9; II Cor. 6:17). However, here 
Paul  was  circumscribed  by  the  effectual  call  of  God  (Gal.  1:15)  for  a  cause  of 
unparalleled  proportions.  Specifically,  it  was  not  simply  a summons to  an office, 
but to a unique message ministry of universal importance (Gal. 1:8-9), the gospel, 
which is “the gospel of God” or “God’s gospel.” 
 
b.  It is evangelistic. 
 
The  expression  “gospel  of  God”  may  more  particularly  be  understood  as  (a)  the 
gospel  “belonging  to  God,”  or  (b)  the  gospel  “about  God,”  or  (c)  the  gospel 
“sourced in God,” or (d) the gospel “sent by God,” (cf. Mark 1:14; Rom. 15:16; 
II Cor. 11:7; I Thess. 2:2, 8, 9; I Tim. 1:11). Both (c) and (d) seem to incorporate 
the  primary  truth  here,  though  the  Gospel  that  comes  from  God  is  at  the  same 
time His treasure to impart and very much descriptive of His glorious Being. 
 
                                              
3
  Ibid., p. 140. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  10
(1)  At  the  end  of  this  twentieth  century,  when  man  in  his  technological  and 
sophisticated  arrogance  has  made  subtle  yet  debilitating  inroads  into  the 
Christian  church  and  pervasively  rendered  it  as  man-centered,  there  is  a 
critical need for the “gospel of God” to be proclaimed in all of its purity. Of 
course  this  presupposes  that  the  “gospel  of  God  in  the  name  of  man”  must 
be  demolished.  After  all,  the  Christian  gospel  is  first  and  foremost  about 
God, and this emphasis must be reinvested into faithful evangelistic ministry.  
 
(2)  Robert Haldane comments:  
It  is  the  Gospel  of  God,  inasmuch  as  God  is  its  author,  its  interpreter,  its 
subject: its author, as He has purposed it in His eternal decrees; its interpreter, 
as  He  himself  hath  declared  it  to  men;  its  subject,  because  in  the  Gospel  His 
sovereign perfections and purposes towards men are manifested. For the same 
reasons  it  is  also  called  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  the  Gospel  of  peace, 
the Gospel of the kingdom, the Gospel of salvation, the everlasting Gospel, the 
glorious gospel of the blessed God.
4
 
 
(3)  Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments:  
The gospel! Oh! How easily we use this term! How glibly we repeat it! I am as 
guilty as anybody else. It ought to be impossible for us to use the word ‘gospel’ 
without  bursting  forth,  as  it  were,  into  a  hymn  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. 
Good  news  from  God,  that  is  the  gospel.  And  that  brings  me  to  the  most 
important thing of all - it is the gospel of God. In other words, it is what God 
has done about man, and about his salvation. And that is why, of course, it is 
quite unique and quite new.
5
  
 
 
B.  GOD’S GOSPEL, THE GROUND OF FELLOWSHIP, VS. 2-6 
 
The  remainder  of  this  salutation  is  concerned with  the  summary  features of  “the  gospel  of 
God,” such as “which” gospel, “who” is the chief gospel character, and “what” the gospel 
accomplishes.  While  Paul’s  lack  of  personal  familiarity  with  this  church  may  have 
encouraged him to commence with this authoritative gospel detail,
6
 he is more likely driven 
by a sense of anticipation concerning the truth he is burdened to unfold in subsequent detail. 
Here is an encapsulation of the message of Romans. 
 
1.  It is one promised gospel, v. 2a. 
 
To  draw  our  focus  toward  the  historic  grandeur  of  the  gospel,  Paul  helps  us  to 
appreciate  the  cumulative  revelation  of  this  message  over  past  centuries.  This  only 
magnifies  the  recent  dawning  of  the  Savior  in  fulfillment  of  Scripture,  who,  in  Titus 
1:1-2, is the source of “the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised 
long ago.” 
 
                                              
4
  Robert Haldane, Romans, p. 26. 
5
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 1:1-32, p. 59. 
6
  John Murray suggests this intent of Paul since he had not founded or visited the church at Rome, Epistle to 
the Romans, I, p. 1. 
SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL  11
a.  In  the  light  of  human  history  since  the  fall  of  Adam,  there  has  been  only  one 
gospel  that  has  been  designed  by  God  as  the  remedy  for  man’s  hopeless 
predicament.  This  “gospel  of  God,”  explicitly  promised  in  the  Old  Testament, 
was  yet  explicitly  revealed  in  the  New  Testament.  Thus  it  could  be  said  that  the 
New Testament gospel is the fulfillment of the Old Testament gospel promise. The 
gospel  of  the  New  Testament  was  not  an  afterthought,  as  if  designed  to  be  a 
substitute  for  a  failed  Old  Testament  gospel;  it  was  not  a  superior  gospel  of 
“grace”  designed  to  supplant  an  inferior  gospel  of  “law,”  as  Abraham  will 
demonstrate in 4:1-5, 9-25. The only hope of salvation for Adam and Eve was by 
grace through faith in God’s atoning provision, specifically the death, burial, and 
resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ (Gen. 3:15, 21). 
 
b.  In the Old Testament economy, amidst a world of pagan and false prophets, God 
appointed  “My  servants  the  prophets”  (Jer.  7:25;  Ezek.  38:17;  Dan.  9:6,  10; 
Amos 3:7),
7
 a divinely ordained company originating from the time of Moses, as 
His  spokesmen.  Not  only  did  they  promise  judgment,  but  also  salvation  through 
Messiah (Luke 1:67-72; Rom. 3:21; 16:26). And Isaiah is representative when he 
proclaims,  “How  lovely  on  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  who  brings  good 
news, who announces peace and brings good news of happiness, who announces 
salvation, and says to Zion, ‘Your God reigns!’” (Isa. 52:7; cf. 40:9; 61:1). 
 
2.  It is one inscripturated gospel, v. 2b. 
 
The  appointed  vehicle  of  this  promised  “gospel  of  God”  is  the  “Holy  Scriptures,”  or 
“Sacred  Writings,”  that  is  grafa‹j  ¡g…aij,  graphais  hagiais,  a  collection  of  objective, 
concrete  records,  and  not  oral  tradition.
8
  For  Paul,  the  essential  sacredness  of  these 
Scriptures is the fact that they have been exhaled from the truthful and unerring mouth 
of  God  (II  Tim.  3:16)  through  the  Spirit  of  God  (II  Pet.  1:20-21).  As  such,  the 
Scriptures are unique in this world. And as a consequence, the message of the gospel is 
indivisibly related to the record of the Gospel, and thus they are identically sacred. In 
practical  terms  for  today,  only  an  infallible  Word  from  God  can  reliably  declare  the 
“gospel of God.” 
 
3.  It is one Christ-centered gospel, vs. 3-4 
 
That  “God’s  servants  the  prophets”  specifically  promised  the  Messiah  as  the  coming 
Savior is abundantly declared throughout the Old Testament. However here this Savior 
is  described  as  “His  [God’s]  Son,”  that  is  the  Son  of  He  who  has  revealed  “good 
news,”  v.  1.  In  other  words,  the  gospel  and  the  Son  of  God  are  intimately  related. 
Haldane  comments:  “It  is  of Him  [Jesus Christ]  that  the  Gospel of  God,  promised  by 
the  prophets,  treats;  so  that  He  is  not  simply  a  legislator  or  interpreter  of  the  Divine 
will,  like  Moses,  and  the  Prophets, and the  Apostles.  .  .  . But  it  is  altogether  different 
respecting  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  exclusively  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  Gospel,  its 
                                              
7
  Refer to Edward J. Young’s classic study of this subject, My Servants the Prophets, 224 pp. 
8
  While  Warfield  describes,  concerning  this  verse,  “Paul’s  conception  of  Scripture  as  the  crystallized  voice  of 
God,” he further states that the Apostle, “explicitly declares, not of the writers of Scripture, but of the sacred 
writings themselves, that they are theopneustic—breathed out, or breathed into by God (II Tim. 3:16).” The 
Inspiration and Authority of the Bible, pp. 317-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  12
proper object, its beginning and its end.”
9
 However, more about the uniqueness of this 
Savior is now unfolded.  
 
a.  A fully human Christ, v. 3. 
 
(1)  This  Son  of  God,  being  preexistent,
10
  was  born  into  carnal,  fleshly,  human 
existence  by  means  of  the  seed  of  David.  In  other  words,  coming  from  the 
bosom  of  the  Father  (John  1:1,  18),  Jesus  Christ  was  born  of  Mary,  while 
espoused  to  Joseph  (Matt.  1:1-16),  and  as  such  is  descended  from  King 
David to whom the promise of Messiah was confirmed (Is. 11:1; Jer. 23:5-6; 
John 7:42; Acts 13:22-23). 
 
(2)  More  correctly,  this  Son  of  God  was  “made”  (KJV)  or  “born”  (NASB), 
aorist of g…nomai,ginomai, to take on “flesh” (Gal. 4:4), and to Paul this is a 
significant  and  necessary  characteristic.  While  in  7:5,  18,  25,  the  context 
indicates that “sinful flesh” is in mind, here the context of v. 4 indicates that 
“sinless flesh,” governed by “the Spirit of holiness,” rather than “the spirit of 
holiness,”  is  intended.  Hence  this  Son  qualifies  as  the  “last  Adam  [who] 
became  a  life-giving  spirit”  (I  Cor.  15:45).  As  Charles  Wesley  has  written, 
this Christ is: 
Our God contracted to a span, 
Incomprehensibly made man. 
 
(3)  The incarnation is clearly taught here, namely that God in heaven, having a 
Son  in  heaven,  has  sent  this  Son  from  heaven  to  assume  an  earthly,  human 
dress  (John  1:14;  Phil.  2:5-8);  He  took  on  sinless  humanity  to  save  sinful 
humanity  (Heb.  4:15;  10:19-20).  Upon  this  momentous  event  in  human 
history hangs the substance of the gospel; it was of such epochal significance 
that  the  prophets  long  ago  gave  preparatory  announcements  of  this 
incomparable and wonderful event (Isa. 40:3-5). 
 
b.  A fully divine Christ, v. 4a. 
 
(1)  But  more  than  being  “made”  of  human  flesh,  v.  3,  he  was  “declared”  or 
“designated” or “marked out,” aorist of Ðr…zw,orizo¯, as the Son of God (Ps. 
2:7).  This  was  the  Father’s  doing,  His  begettal  of  the  eternal  Son  in  human 
flesh,  His  attestation,  though  with  certain  accompanying  characteristics  of 
deity.  
 
(2)  Consequently this “declared” Son of God was “with power,” though exactly 
in what way? Strictly, the order here does not say, “declared with power the 
Son  of  God”  NIV.  Rather,  he  was  “declared  the  Son  of  God  with  power” 
KJV, NASB, as “raised up again, . . . having been exalted to the right hand of 
God, . . . therefore let all the house of Israel know for certain that God has 
                                              
9
  Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 27. 
10
  John  Murray  writes:  “There  are  good  reasons  for  thinking  that  in  this  instance  the  title  refers  to  a  relation 
which  the  Son  sustains  to  the  Father  antecedently  to  and  independently  of  his  manifestation  in  the  flesh.” 
Romans, I, pp. 5-6. 
SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL  13
made  Him  both  Lord  [sovereign]  and  Christ—this  Jesus  whom  you 
crucified”  (Acts  2:32-33,  36).  Therefore  the  resurrection  is  the  justification, 
the  grand  vindication  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  demonstrably  valid  saving 
object for the believing sinner (Acts 2:22-24; 13:29-33; 17:30-31).  
 
(3)  Further,  in  contrast  with  the  “[sinless]  flesh”  of  v.  3,  the  “Spirit  [unlikely 
‘spirit’] of holiness”
11
 was powerfully operative in this incarnate Christ who 
was inevitably raised from the dead (Acts 13:32-33).  
 
c.  A fully human and divine Christ, v. 4b.  
 
(1)  The KJV does not follow the Greek so accurately in vs. 3-4. The NASB and 
NIV  are  more  accurate,  especially  as  they  rightly  conclude  this  majestic 
doctrinal  declaration  with  the  encompassing  declaration,  “Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.”  Lloyd-Jones  comments  that  this,  “is  undoubtedly  the  right  way  to 
consider it, because it forms a sort of natural climax. . . . In other words, it is 
a  kind  of  summing  up  of  everything  the  Apostle  has  been  telling  us  about 
Him in these two great statements [vs. 3-4]; it is because they are true of Him 
that He is Jesus Christ our Lord.”
12
  
 
(2)  This God-man then, truly perfect in humanity and fullness of deity, is “Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord”  (Col.  1:22;  2:9).  This  is  the  totality  of  his  being,  this 
“theanthropic”  person.  In  his  commentary  on  Romans,  James  Montgomery 
Boice devotes one whole chapter to this climactic expression.
13
 He points out 
that  it  is  akin  to  the  early  church  confession  that  “Jesus  is  Lord,”  which 
means that Jesus is both God and Savior; further it means that Jesus is Lord 
for  the  believers  in  Rome  as  a  whole,  and  not  simply  a  smaller  and  more 
spiritual group who have also accepted him as Savior ( Matt. 22:41-46; Luke 
2:11; I Cor. 8:4-6; Phil. 2:5-11).  
 
(3)  The Athanasian Creed, c. 450 A.D., declares that, “the right Faith is, that we 
believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and 
man.”
14
 In church history, there have been two doctrinal extremes that have 
frequently produced opposite heresies. 
 
(a)  Jesus Christ is more human than divine.  
 
1)  Arianism, Jehovah’s Witnesses = Jesus was a god. 
 
2)  Adoptionism = Jesus was a man adopted by the Father. 
 
                                              
11
  Douglas Moo, Romans 1-8, pp. 49-43. Argument is here given that Paul has in mind the “Spirit of holiness” 
rather than the “spirit of holiness.” In agreement, Bruce comments that, “The spirit of holiness is the regular 
Hebrew way of saying ‘the Holy Spirit’; and Paul here reproduces the Hebrew idiom in Greek.” Romans, p. 
73. For further support, refer to Calvin, Haldane, Morris, and Murray. Contra are Hodge and Lloyd-Jones.  
12
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, p. 128. 
13
  James Montgomery Boice, Romans, I, pp. 45-52. 
14
  Philip Schaff, The Creeds of Christendom, II, p. 68. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  14
3)  Liberalism = Jesus was godly. 
 
(b)  Jesus Christ is more divine than human. 
 
1)  Gnosticism, Christian Science = Jesus was a phantom. 
 
2)  Docetism = Jesus seemed to be a man. 
 
3)  Marcionism = Jesus was chiefly revealed by Paul. 
 
(4)  The  danger  here  is  that  in  the  mysteries  of  the  truth  concerning  the  divine 
and  human nature  of Jesus  Christ, we  become more  absorbed  with  cerebral 
challenge  rather  than  heart  encounter.  Yet  it  is  obvious  that  here  Paul  is 
moved in the depths of his soul at the contemplation of this Savior’s glorious 
person.  He  parallels  the  Apostle  John’s  initial  exaltation  of  Christ  in  John 
1:1-18.  Matthew  Henry  captures  this  apostolic  wonderment  as  follows: 
“When Paul mentions Christ, how he heaps up his names and titles, his Son 
Jesus Christ  our  Lord, as  one  that took  a pleasure  in  speaking  of  him;  and, 
having  mentioned  him,  he  cannot  go  on  in  his  discourse  without  some 
expression of love and honor, as here, where in one person he shows us his 
two distinct natures.”
15
 
 
4.  It is one universal gospel, v. 5. 
 
It is a wondrous truth that Jesus Christ is both God and man, divine and human, and 
vindicated as such by his resurrection from the dead. Yet this is but glorious fact, and 
beyond such truth purpose must be discovered. So in v. 5 we have revealed the design 
of the incarnation as it relates to both man and God. 
 
a.  The universal proclaimer. 
 
(1)  He,  Paul,  has  been  ordained  by  Christ,  not  men  (Gal.  1:1,  15-16);  but 
further,  this  divine  vocation  includes  divine  enabling.  So  Paul  describes 
himself,  using  the  plural  of  indirect  identity,  as  “we  [who]  have  received 
grace  and  apostleship.”  That  is,  he  has  received  particular  saving  grace  and 
particular apostolic calling, cf. v. 6.   
 
(2)  In his commentary on Romans, John MacArthur mentions the experience of 
both  Donald  Grey  Barnhouse  and  himself  in  their  being  ordained,  with  the 
laying  on  of  hands,  by  certain  men  who  later  departed  from  the  faith.  He 
then comments, “Like Dr. Barnhouse, I give thanks to God that my ministry 
did not come from men but from Christ Himself.”
16
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
15
  Matthew Henry, Matthew Henry’s Commentary, VI, p. 364. 
16
  John MacArthur, Romans 1-8, p. 23. 
SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL  15
b.  The universal purpose as it concerns man. 
 
(1)  The  ordained  task  is  the  obtaining of  the  “obedience  of  faith  among all  the 
Gentiles.” Note that this Epistle ends by describing this same purpose, 16:26. 
Specifically, Paul’s mission (Acts 9:15) is to have as its goal a definite quality 
of harvested faith which is to be distinguished from a more patronizing and 
casual  faith  that  is  representative  of  contemporary  evangelism.  Murray 
describes the nerve of Paul’s thought as follows: “Faith is regarded as an act 
of obedience, of commitment to the gospel of Christ. Hence the implications 
of  this  expression  ‘obedience  of  faith’  are  far-reaching.  For  the  faith  which 
the  apostleship  was  intended  to  promote  was  not  an  evanescent  [quickly 
fading]  act  of  emotion  but  the  commitment  of  wholehearted  devotion  to 
Christ  and  to  the  truth  of  his  gospel.  It  is  to  such  faith  that  all  nations  are 
called.”
17
  
 
(2)  So Paul has a broad missionary vision. As in 16:26, so here this “obedience 
of  faith”  is  to  be  solicited  from  among  all  the  “Gentiles  [nations],”  œqnoj, 
ethnos.  Again  in  15:18,  Paul’s  ministry  has  sought  “the  obedience  of  the 
Gentiles by word and deed,” through his preaching of “the gospel of Christ,” 
v.  19.  By  way  of  contrast,  in  10:16,  21  Israel  has  responded  with  the 
“disobedience  of  faith.”  In  other  words,  Paul’s  ministry  is  to  seek  out  that 
promised  “obedience  of  faith”  from  among  the  Gentiles  which  will  in  turn 
eventually provoke Israel to jealousy (9:30-33; 11:11, 15, 25).
 
c.  The universal purpose as it concerns God. 
 
While  God’s  purposes  have  levels  of  intent,  such  as  his  will  on  earth,  in  heaven, 
and  the  building  of  His  church,  His  ultimate  purpose  is  His  own  glorification 
(Eph.  1:5-6,  12;  I  Pet.  4:11).  Jesus  Christ  saves  sinners  and  gives  them  glory  so 
that they might return glory to Him (John 17:9-10, 22). So here, the saving of the 
Gentiles  is  to  bring  honor  and  glory  to  Christ  (Rom.  11:33-36),  that  is  “for  His 
name’s  sake,”  or  vindication.  Haldane  comments:  “The  world  was  created  for 
God’s glory, and His glory is the chief end of the restoration of sinners. . . . Men 
are  very  unwilling  to  admit  that  God  should  have  any  end  with  respect  to  them 
greater than their happiness.”
18
  
 
5.  It is one sovereign gospel, v. 6. 
 
The Christians  at  Rome  are  encouraged  with the  declaration  that  they  are part  of  the 
calling of the Gentiles by Jesus Christ, even as Paul has received an apostolic calling, v. 
1.  Such  a  calling  here  is  more  than  an  invitation;  it  is  a  potent  wooing,  an  effectual 
drawing with cords of sovereign grace (8:28; I Cor. 1:9; 26-29). All Christians, whether 
Jewish or Gentile, should have a strong sense of spiritual vocation according to God’s 
particular summons. As James Grindlay Small has written: 
 
                                              
17
  Murray, I, Romans, pp. 13-14. 
18
  Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 40. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  16
      I’ve found a Friend; O such a Friend! 
         He loved me ere I knew Him: 
      He drew me with the cords of love, 
         And thus He bound me to Him; 
      And round my heart still closely twine 
         Those ties which nought can sever; 
      For I am His, and He is mine, 
         For ever and for ever. 
 
 
C.  GOD’S GOSPEL, THE GROUND OF BENEDICTION, V. 7 
 
Here,  for  the  Christian,  both  reclusiveness  and  worldliness  are  repudiated.  Rather  the 
believer  is  in  the  midst  of  pagan  Rome  and  yet  consecrated  or  set  apart  from  it  through 
divine  calling  as  beloved  by  God.  Such  insulation  without  isolation  qualifies  for  the 
outpouring of “grace and peace.” 
 
1.  The objects of benediction, v. 7a. 
 
In  all  that  follows  in  Romans,  that  is  the  comprehensive  doctrine  of  the  gospel  and 
consequent exhortation to gospel living, here Paul succinctly incorporates this body of 
truth  within  the  terms  of  the  benediction,  “grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” 
 
a.  Beloved of God. 
 
Paul’s  true  ecumenism  incorporates  all  Christians  in  Rome  who  are  “beloved  of 
God,”  not  simply  those  who  claim  to  love  God.  No  distinction  is  made  with 
regard to Jew or Gentile, patrician or plebeian or slave, as he will elaborate upon 
in greater detail, 3:9, 22-23.  
 
b.  Called as saints. 
 
The  previously  mentioned  “calling,”  v.  6,  is  now  defined  in  terms  of  purpose, 
which is the “setting apart,” the definitive sanctification or particular consecration 
of  the  sinner,  by  God.  This  common  term  of  address  emphasizes  the  believer’s 
distinctiveness.  All  genuine  Christians  are  “saints,”  and  not  some  special,  super-
holy class. 
 
2.  The blessings of benediction, v. 7b. 
 
“Grace  and  peace”  here  are  not  identical  with  initial  saving  grace  (Eph.  2:8-9)  and 
peace  with  (from)  God  resulting  from  justification  (Rom.  5:1).  Here  Paul,  as  is 
customary  in  most  of  his  epistles,  prays  for  grace  and  peace,  that  is  daily  sanctifying 
grace  and  peace,  to  be  bestowed  upon  those  who  have  received  grace  and  peace.  For 
the  progressing  Christian  there  is  an  ongoing  supply  of  “grace  upon  grace”  (John 
1:16).  
 
 
 
SALUTATION IN THE GOSPEL  17
3.  The source of benediction, v. 7c. 
 
The Father and the Son are linked here, according to an essential bosom and economic 
relationship (John 1:18), and thus together mediate “grace and peace.” The dignity of 
this relationship is but a further reflection of the exalted description of the Lord Jesus 
Christ revealed in v. 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
ROMANS 1:8-15 - INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL 
 
 
S  the  salutation  has  moved  from  definitive  apostolic  and  gospel  identification  to  a  more 
particular  address  of  the  Roman  saints,  so  Paul  now  becomes  far  more  personal  and 
spiritually intimate in his paving the way for instruction in the meat and marrow of the gospel. 
Here is evidenced heartfelt pastoral warmth, after the manner of a tender “nursing mother, . . . a 
father” (I Thess. 2:7, 11). Paul well knows that he intends to minister in his letter, “very boldly 
[daringly, tolmhrÒj, tolme¯ros, cf. II Pet. 2:10] to you on some points,” 15:15, yet his anticipated 
visit  will  be  marked  by  spiritual  enjoyment,  material  assistance,  rest,  and  “the  fulness  of  the 
blessing of Christ,” 16:24, 29, 32. In spite of his inherent authority, Paul also looks forward to 
mutual  encouragement  with  a  congregation  that  is  in  no  way  described  as  immature,  1:8,  12; 
15:14. 
 
 
A.  PAUL’S PRAYERFUL DELIGHT IN THE ROMANS, VS. 8-12 
 
His  characteristic,  prayerful  manner  of  thanksgiving  at  the  outset  (I  Cor.  1:4;  Phil.  1:3-4; 
Col.  1:3;  I  Thess.  1:2;  II  Thess.  1:3;  II  Tim.  1:3;  Philem.  4-5)  reflects  his  overall  prayerful 
style of writing, 6:17; 7:25; 10:1; 12:12; 15:30.  
 
1.  Their gospel witness to the world, v. 8.  
 
a.  The manner of Paul’s grateful address is here, as elsewhere, to “my God” (I Cor. 
1:4;  Phil.  1:3;  Col.  1:3,  12;  3:17)  the  Father  “through  Jesus  Christ,”  that  is  the 
access that his atonement has obtained (Eph. 5:20; Col. 3:17; I Pet. 2:5). 
 
b.  The  happy  concern  of  Paul’s  address  is  the  Roman  saints’  evident  faith,  or  “the 
faith,”  or  personal  gospel  witness  that  has  been  effectively  “proclaimed,” 
kataggšllw, katangello¯ , or witnessed/announced throughout “the whole world.” 
This  expression  of  universal  outreach  is  not  mere  hyperbole  for  the  whole 
inhabited earth, but rather, as similarly described in Acts 19:10, 20, indicative of 
the  pervasive  gospel  witness  that  resulted  through  the  agencies  and  populace  of 
the Roman empire. Several years later, when imprisoned in Rome, the Apostle will 
send  greetings  to  the  church  at  Philippi  from  the  saints  “of  Caesar’s  household” 
(Phil. 4:22), that is converts of “the imperial household, the meanest slaves as well 
as the most powerful courtiers.”
1
  
 
c.  In these times of spiritual declension, such a commendation of the church at Rome 
by Paul ought to make us feel jealous for such an authentic and effective ministry. 
The  Roman  historian  Tacitus  tells  us  that,  during  the  early  years  of  the  first 
century, Rome was a “receptacle for everything that is sordid and degrading from 
every  quarter  of  the  globe.”
2
  Yet  while  suffering  unspeakable  persecution  as  the 
                                              
1
  J. B. Lightfoot, St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians, p. 171. 
2
  Henry Bettenson, ed., Documents of the Christian Church, p. 2. 
A 
INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL  19
objects of sadistic sport, the Christians made an indelible impression. Early in the 
second century the Letter to Diognetus, by an anonymous Christian, tells of how 
this  holy  influence  challenged  an  unholy  world.  “Every  foreign  land  is  their 
fatherland  and  every  fatherland  a  foreign  land.  They  marry  as  do  all;  they  beget 
children, but they do not destroy their offspring. They have a common table, but 
not a common bed. They are in the flesh but do not live after the flesh. They pass 
their days on earth, but they are citizens of heaven. They obey the prescribed laws, 
and  at  the  same  time  surpass  the  laws  by  their  lives.  They  love  all  men,  and  are 
persecuted by all.”
3
  
 
2.  His pastoral prayer for the brethren, vs. 9-10. 
 
While Paul is constantly active in prayer, yet the substance of his praying is the cause of 
the gospel, and particularly those saved by the gospel and their gospel ministry. All of 
this interest subsumes under his soul’s unqualified service of God and His gospel (1:1). 
The subsequent, grand exposition of this gospel only reinforces this point. 
 
a.  It is gospel grounded praying, v. 9. 
 
As is common with the Apostle’s manner of praying, he addresses God the Father 
through God the Son (I Cor. 1:4; Eph. 1:16-17; Col. 1:3). Here, in the form of an 
oath as a way of being emphatic (cf. II Cor. 1:23; 11:31; Gal. 1:20; I Thess. 2:5), 
Paul  passionately  declares  his  commitment  to  the  Roman  saints.  His  service  to 
God is singular, “in his spirit,” and dominated by the gospel of the grace of God. 
Such devotion is thus directed through the saints at Rome; its transparent sincerity 
is  intended  to  gain  the  ready  acceptance  of  what  follows.  Paul’s  knowledge  of 
such  ecumenical  proclamation  by  the  Roman  saints  “throughout  the  whole 
world”  indicates  not  only  his  regular  contact  through  numerous  couriers  and 
missionaries  with  various  Christian  churches  and  settlements  amongst  the 
Gentiles, but also his promotion of this network of ministry. 
However, for a man so committed to the sovereignty of God in all of his labors, 
does  not  such  an  emphasis  on  prayer  inject  a  conflict  involving  contingency? 
Haldane comments:  
But  since  all  events  are  fixed,  even  from  eternity,  in  the  counsels  and  wisdom  of 
God,  of  what  avail,  it  may  be  said  are  these  prayers?  Can  they  change  his  eternal 
counsels,  and  the  settled  order  of  events?  Certainly  not.  But  God  commands  us  to 
pray, and even the prayers of his people are included in his decrees; and what God 
has resolved to do, he often gives to their prayers. Instead of them being vain, they 
are among the means through which God executes his decrees.
4
 
 
b.  It is a yearning to come to Rome, v. 10.  
 
Why did Paul travel so much? It was not to see the sights of such places as Athens, 
Corinth,  and  Ephesus,  in  conjunction  with  his  missionary  endeavors,  but  for  the 
exclusive cause of the souls of men. Likewise his interest in Rome did not include 
                                              
3
  Michael Green, Evangelism in the Early Church, pp. 135-6. 
4
  Robert Haldane, Exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, p. 37. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  20
a cultural regard for the Forum, Colosseum, Circus Maximus, Pantheon, etc., but 
“you,”  the  “beloved  of  God  in  Rome,  called  as  saints,”  v.  7.  However,  his 
personal  desire  in  this  regard  must  yield  to  God’s  timing.  Hence  Paul’s  mention 
here  of  the  “will  of  God”  indicates  that  he  did  not  perceive  his  travels  to  be 
arranged according to his own itinerary.  
 
3.  His pastoral desire to stimulate maturity, v. 11. 
 
a.  Paul  particularly  desires  to  “impart  some  spiritual  gift”  to  the  body  of  Roman 
believers, and obviously this necessitated his physical presence. Better, he desired 
to  “share,”  metad…dwmi,  metadido¯ mi,  cf.  I  Thess.  2:8),  that  is  his  own  spiritual 
ministry, cf. v. 12, with the intent of stimulating “fruitfulness,” v. 13. Lloyd-Jones 
comments, “Surely the explanation is that he wants to visit them at Rome in order 
that he may do thoroughly for them what he is now doing in a summary form in 
the letter that he is now writing to them. . . . And the way in which he does that is 
by means of the teaching.”
5
 
 
b.  Whether  with  his  letter  or  presence,  Paul’s  primary  interest  in  the  Roman 
Christians  is  the stability  of their faith.  The  word  “to  establish” here is sthr…zw, 
ste¯ rizo¯ , and its use in 16:25 indicates that it is the gospel of “the only wise God,” 
v.  27,  mediated  through  Paul’s  preaching  of  “Jesus  Christ”  (cf.  Acts  18:23;  I 
Thess.  3:2).  Again  we  see  the  significance  of  the  sanctifying  effect  of  the  gospel 
and related truth.  
 
4.  His pastoral desire for mutual fellowship, v. 12. 
 
With gentle qualification concerning, “that you may be established,” v. 11, Paul adds 
that  he  desires  “mutual  comfort/encouragement,”  sumparakalšw,  sumparakaleo¯ .  He 
has no desire to convey an air of apostolic dominance such as in an hierarchical sense 
represented by the papacy or episcopacy; rather he will stimulate spiritual growth with 
a sweet and humble spirit. As Charles Wesley has written: 
All praise to our redeeming Lord, 
Who joins us by His grace, 
And bids us, each to each restored, 
Together seek His face. 
He bids us build each other up; 
And, gathered into one, 
To our high calling’s glorious hope 
We hand in hand go on.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
5
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, p. 226.  
INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL  21
B.  PAUL’S RELUCTANT DELAY WITH THE ROMANS, VS. 13-15 
 
The  Apostle  is  like  a  frustrated  parent  who,  having  been  separated  from  his  children, 
anxiously longs for immediate reunion. He acknowledges this church to be aligned with the 
Gentiles and as such is part of his paternal concern, especially with regard to ministering the 
gospel to them.  
 
1.  He is prevented from coming to them, v. 13. 
 
a.  The  reason(s)  are  not  revealed  and  can  only  be  speculative,  such  as  revelation, 
persecution, travel restrictions, pastoral needs, etc. However, Haldane comments: 
“His  [Paul’s]  being  hindered,  by  whatever  means,  from  going  to  Rome,  when  he 
intended  it,  shows  that  the  Apostles  were  sometimes  thwarted  in  their  purposes, 
and were not always under the guidance of Divine inspiration in their plans.
6
 
 
b.  The fruit sought, while possibly a collection for Jerusalem as received from other 
Gentile churches, is most likely spiritual productivity that results in the “stability” 
mentioned in v. 11 (cf.  “fruit” karpÒj, karpos, used in this sense, 6:21, 22; Gal. 
5:22;  Eph.  5:9;  Phil.  1:11;  also  John  15:16).  Paul  was  “results”  oriented  in  his 
ministry, though not in any modern, carnal statistical sense; rather he longed for 
spiritual maturity in the Gentiles churches (Eph. 4:13-16), even safe and sanctified 
arrival before “our Lord Jesus Christ at His coming” (I Thess. 2:11-12, 19). 
 
2.  He is obliged to minister to them, v. 14. 
 
a.  Why is Paul under “obligation”?     
 
(1)  Because he has received a specific apostolic calling. 
 
He is a minister under authority, having been sovereignly called of God (1:1; 
Acts  13:2;  Gal.  1:15).  I  Corinthians  9:16-17  best  explains  this  weight  of 
responsibility,  where  it  is  described  as  “compulsion”  or  necessity,  and 
“stewardship entrusted unto me” or commission as a slave. 
 
(2)  Because he has received a specific apostolic mandate. 
 
He is a minister under orders to primarily declare the gospel to the Gentiles, 
though not exclusively (Acts 9:15-16; 18:1-6; 19:1-10). Ephesians 3:6-7 best 
explains  this  universal  directive  where  Paul  is  a  “minister,”  di£konoj, 
diakonos, or servant commanded to “preach to the Gentiles [hence the whole 
inhabited earth] the unfathomable riches of Christ.”  
 
b.  To “whom” is Paul under obligation?   
 
The Christian assembly at Rome was undoubtedly composed of a large segment of 
Gentiles,  among  who  were  representatives  of  the  various  stratas  of  that  society, 
though  with  the  lower  classes  predominating.  Hence  Paul  is  intent  on  making 
                                              
6
  Haldane, Romans, p. 51. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  22
clear that “his gospel” (2:16) is for sinners of every stripe without distinction; it is 
not merely for the intelligentsia. Of course the question of Israel’s relationship to 
this gospel will be dealt with in chapters 9-11. His coming will not focus merely 
on patricians, as the following diagram illustrates.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So Lloyd-Jones expounds: “The gospel of Jesus Christ is needed by everybody. It 
does  not  matter  whether  you  have  been  born  in  Great  Britain  or  in  Japan  or  in 
one  of  the  countries  of  South  America;  the  gospel  is  needed  by  all.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  ‘Christian  nation’,  and  you  are  not  a  Christian  because  you  are 
born in a so-called Christian country. It does not matter whether people are good 
or bad, morally speaking; they all need the gospel. So you need to preach it and to 
talk  about  it  to  the  most  respectable  as  well  as  to  the  most  profligate  and 
dissolute. The same gospel! And the learned people and the philosophers stand in 
exactly the same need of this as the most ignorant person conceivable.”
7
 
 
3.  He is eager to preach to them, v. 15. 
 
a.  Not only was Paul commissioned by God, but he was eager for the cause of God’s 
gospel;  he  was  enthusiastic  under  orders  and  thus  delighted  in  evangelistic 
proclamation. Here he engages the attention of the Roman believers by expressing 
his passion, his great zeal for “preaching the gospel” upon his anticipated arrival. 
Paul  was  the  antithesis  of  a  professional  man  of  religion.  The  word  here  is 
eÙaggel…zw, euangelizo¯ , which focuses on the content of the proclamation rather 
than the method, as khrÚssw, kerusso¯ , would indicate; cf. 10:5 where both words 
are used. Likewise Romans focuses upon the content of the gospel rather than the 
manner of its communication. 
 
b.  But  what  does  the  Apostle  mean  when  he  describes  his  prospective  audience  as 
“you  also  who  are  in  Rome”?  Some  might  feel  that  he  has  in  mind  the 
evangelization of pagan Rome in general.
8
 However the context strongly suggests 
                                              
7
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 1:1-32, p. 248. 
8
  Douglas  Moo,  while  rejecting  this  perspective,  points  out  that  this  is  Paul’s  normal  use  of  euangelizo¯ , 
eÙaggel…zw. 
Greeks
›llhsin
(helle¯sin) 
articulate sinners 
wise sinners 
patrician sinners 
upper class sinners 
free sinners 
bourgeoisie sinners 
educated sinners 
barbarians
barb£roij 
(barbarois) 
babbling sinners 
foolish sinners 
plebeian sinners 
lower class sinners 
slave sinners  
proletarian sinners 
uneducated sinners 
PAUL’S MINISTRY
TO THE NON-JEWISH WORLD 
INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL  23
“you”  refers  to  the  Christian  assembly  in  the  imperial  city.  The  overwhelming 
proof  here  is  the  subsequent  doctrinal  exposition  of  the  gospel  that  immediately 
follows.  In  other  words,  Paul  relished  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  those  who 
had formerly believed on hearing the preaching of the gospel. 
 
c.  Application. To evangelize those who have been evangelized may, to some, seem 
wasted effort, as if attempting to sell refrigerators to Eskimos! However, the 
substance of Romans indicates that Paul regards this body of gospel doctrine as 
vital for the ongoing life of the Christian. The gospel is not merely initiatory, as if 
a necessary requirement for entrance into heaven. The gospel saves for time and 
eternity, yet it has ongoing and sanctifying significance for the Christian. Having 
been saved by the gospel, the child of God needs to grow through an expanded 
understanding of the gospel. In other words the gospel, in which justification 
before God is obtained, is yet also the ground of progressive sanctification.
9
 The 
Lord’s Supper is the only repeatable Christian ordinance; it is in fact a gospel 
remembrance feast intended to constantly remind the believer of his reliance upon 
the gospel and result in his spiritual growth. 
 
 
 
 
                                              
9
  J. C. Ryle makes this point crystal clear in pp. 15-33 of his classic work Holiness, and also includes the helpful 
comments in this regard by Robert Trail, pp. 326-330. 
CHAPTER III 
 
ROMANS 1:16-17 - THEME, THE GOSPEL OF THE 
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD 
 
 
HILE there is common agreement among expositors that vs. 16-17 here represent the definitive 
theme of Romans, yet they should not be considered in isolation because of their connection 
with the preceding and proceeding contexts. In v. 15, Paul’s indefatigable boldness is sourced in the 
gospel which in vs. 16-17 finds its justification in terms of its essential and glorious nature. In vs. 18-
3:20 the gospel finds its gracious necessity in the condemnation of God that continues to hover over 
all of mankind. Boice comments that here, “we come to sentences that are the most important in the 
letter and perhaps in all literature. They are the theme of this epistle and the essence of Christianity. 
They are the heart of biblical religion.”
1
 
 
 
A.  GOD’S GOSPEL IS DYNAMIC, V. 16a 
 
Since  the  birth  of  the  Christian  church  at  Pentecost,  biblical  Christianity  has  always  been 
characterized  as  dynamic  and  never  static,  active  and  not  passive,  experiential  as  well  as 
doctrinal.  Orthodoxy  sans  orthopraxy  has  always  resulted  in  frigid  formality  that  shuns 
spontaneous  manifestations  of  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul;  such  passion  is  condemned  as 
“enthusiasm” and “pietism.” During the revivalism of the eighteenth century in New England, 
Whitefield, Edwards, Tennent, along with their pastoral supporters, were termed “New-Lights” 
on  account  of  their  preaching  zeal,  in  contrast  with  the  more  staid  “Old-Lights”  (Murray, 
Jonathan Edwards, pp. 209-216). Doubtless Paul was a “New-Light” as well with regard to his 
regenerate fervor which is now more profoundly explained. 
 
1.  Paul’s negative affirmation. 
 
  Being  “not  ashamed  of  the  gospel”  is  the  negative  expression  of  Paul’s  “eagerness" 
described in v. 15. The inference is that the world in general, as well as nominal believers, 
regards  the  gospel,  along  with  its  followers,  as  something  foolish,  shameful,  lowly, 
beggarly, disreputable (cf. I Cor. 1:22-23; 4:10-13). Though II Timothy 1:8 indicates that 
even a pastor is in need of exhortation in this regard.  
 
a.  But for what reasons does the world so despise biblical Christianity when at the same 
time it will at least patronize other world religions? 
 
(1)  Christ and his disciples condemn the world, and to this it responds (John 7:7; 
15:18-19).  
 
(2)  Biblical Christianity denounces humanity in total as being thoroughly corrupt 
(Rom. 3:9-18). 
 
 
                                            
1
  James Montgomery Boice, Romans 1-4, p. 103. 
W 
THEME - THE GOSPEL OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD 
 
25
(3)  Biblical Christianity worships a crucified, non-Machiavellian Savior (Rev. 5:11-
13). 
 
(4)  Biblical Christianity pursues heavenly/spiritual rather than earthly/material goals 
Matt. 6:33; Col. 1:5). 
 
(5)  Biblical Christianity praises humility, selflessness, and denounces assertiveness, 
pride (Jas. 4:6). 
 
(6)  Biblical Christianity confesses personal weakness and dependence (II Cor. 12:9-
10). 
 
(7)  Biblical Christianity condemns human ability intended to impress God (Rom. 
3:20, 27-28). 
 
(8)  Biblical Christianity is intolerant of moral relativism and pluralism (John 14:6; 
Heb. 12:14). 
 
b.  More positively, what Paul is declaring is that when he comes to Rome, as has been 
the case when he visited other notable cities, rather than being impressed with the 
culture and sights, he will arrive with the most glorious message that the patricians, 
plebeians and slaves have ever heard. It is a message Paul boasts and exalts in with 
every part of his soul and body (Gal. 6:14). 
 
2.  Paul’s positive affirmation. 
 
 Positively, the reason Paul is “not ashamed” is the fact that this gospel is incomparable 
being  “the  power  of  God  for  salvation.”  What  specifically  is  this  distinguishing 
characteristic of “power,” dÚnamij,dunamis? 
 
a.  In Rome is evidenced the “power of man” that in fact portrays the impotence of its 
religion,  the  bondage  of  its  corruption  that  knows  no  deliverance.  However,  in 
contrast with this moral void, this cause of and captivity to degradation, is something 
radically different, namely God’s saving omnipotence that conquers the mighty power 
of sin. Such saving power was graphically described in the Old Testament (Ex. 32:11; 
Neh. 1:10; Ps. 77:14-15; Isa. 40:9-10; 52:10; 59:16). 
 
b.  It is the power of God in action, demonstrably evident in the resurrection of His Son 
(1:4; Eph. 1:19-20); He has not remained fixed on a pedestal, or stood silent with 
hundreds of other images under cover of a colonnade or shrine. He is the “living 
God” (I Thess. 1:9-10) who has marched through the earth “for the salvation of His 
people” (Hab. 3:12-13).  
 
c.  It is the power of God that effectually brings “salvation.” The following context 
of 1:18-3:20 indicates that this salvation is from the wrath of God that hovers 
over sinful and guilty mankind (cf. 5:9-10, though 13:11 indicates that there is a 
consummate aspect as well (cf. 8:18-24).  
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
26 
d.  It is the power of God applied in a converting manner, through faith, “to everyone 
who  believes”  (I  Cor.  1:18,  24),  that  is  “the  surpassing  greatness  of  His  power 
toward us who believe” (Eph. 1:19-20). Here then is something worthy of boasting 
in; this gospel is matchless to such a degree that it makes the best of Roman religion 
to appear tawdry and shabby.   
 
e.  Illustration. Morris comments: “The gospel is not advice to people, suggesting that 
they lift themselves. It is power. It lifts them up. Paul does not say that the gospel 
brings  power  but  that  it  is  power,  and  God’s  power  at  that.  When  the  gospel  is 
preached, this is not simply so many words being uttered. The power of God is at 
work. When the gospel enters anyone’s life, it is as though the very fire of God had 
come upon him. There is warmth and light in his life.”
2
 
 
f.  Illustration.  Lloyd-Jones  explains:  “The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God.  It  does  not 
depend upon me and my faithfulness. If it did we would all be lost. It is God’s power 
to keep, to justify and to sanctify and to glorify - to take us right into heaven itself. . . 
. nothing can stop it. It is certain. The gospel works and will work, until all that God 
has purposed by its means shall have been completed.”
3
 
 
 
B.  GOD’S GOSPEL IS UNIVERSAL, V. 16b. 
 
1.  It is to the Jew and Gentile. 
 
  It is “to everyone who believes,” that is Jew and Greek (non-Jew), but only to those who 
believe with works renouncing faith (3:22-23; 4:11; Gal. 3:22, 26-28). Here the sola fide 
(faith alone) emphasis of the Reformation is plainly and definitively stated. The power of 
the gospel is not in faith but in God Himself as faith’s object. Faith, divinely generated, is 
non-meritorious linkage to the atonement of Christ. Here a universal gospel is offered on 
account of a universal problem that transcends human distinctives. Murray states: “There 
is no discrimination arising from race or culture and there is no obstacle arising from the 
degradation of sin. Wherever there is faith, there the omnipotence of God is operative unto 
salvation. This is a law with no exceptions.”
4
 
 
2.  It is to the Jew first. 
 
  But  why  does  Paul,  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  maintain  that  priority  be  given  to  the 
proclamation of the gospel to “the Jew first”? 
 
a.  The inauguration of the gospel by apostolic proclamation was wholly Jewish. Jewish 
disciples preached a Jewish Savior from Jewish Scriptures in the capital of Judaism 
with the result that the first Christian church was Jewish. The times of the Gentiles 
will conclude with the salvation of Israel (11:23-28; Luke 21:24).  
 
 
                                            
2
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 67. 
3
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, pp. 286-7. 
4
  John Murray, Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 28. 
THEME - THE GOSPEL OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD 
 
27
b.  There is a priority given to Jews and Jerusalem, grounded in grace (Deut. 7:6-8), that 
is maintained in the New Testament (Matt. 15:24; Luke 24:47; John 4:22; Acts 1:8; 
13:46). Paul never abandoned Judaism as a whole (9:1-5; 10:1); in fact he continued 
to  identify  himself  as  a  Jew  (Acts  21:39;  22:3).  In  his  missionary  endeavors,  he 
habitually  first  visited  the  local  synagogue  (Acts  17:1-2)  and  just  as  regularly 
experienced  fierce  opposition.  Because  of  this,  on  two  occasions  he  declares  his 
intention of subsequently ministering to the Gentiles (Acts 13:46; 18:6), but this was 
only in a local sense since after spurning the Jews in Corinth (Acts 18:6), he moves to 
Ephesus and first ministers at the synagogue (Acts 19:8).  
 
 
C.  GOD’S GOSPEL IS RIGHTEOUS, V. 17a 
 
The  connection  here  with  v.  16  is  rooted  in  the  pronoun  “it,”  which  clearly  refers  to  “the 
gospel”  which  Paul  so  exalts  in.  Hence,  what  follows  is  an  enlargement  of  this  enthralling 
theme, though the essential term that describes this glorious gospel is “the righteousness of 
God.” Thus in Romans 1:17 we come to that verse which for Martin Luther was, “the climax 
of his difficulties,”
5
 although it appears Psalm 31:1 had earlier raised for him the same problem. 
However,  it  is  also  true  that  Romans  1:17  provided  for  the  Reformer  “open  doors  into 
paradise.”
6
 
 
1.  How is the gospel to be understood as “the righteousness of God”? 
 
This phrase occurs eight times in Romans (1:17; 3:5, 21, 22, 25, 26; 10:3 twice), and its 
strategic importance is obvious. For Paul this was an imposing expression that he marveled 
at since it wedded with perfect harmony both God’s holiness and grace. However, the 
source of this gospel truth is not so much Paul as the Old Testament. Our understanding of 
this point will only enhance our understanding of God’s sole plan of salvation.  
 
a.  “Righteousness” in the Old Testament.  
 
It  means  to  be  “straight”  in  a  moral  sense,  “loyal  without  deviation.”  It  is  the 
positive aspect of God’s holiness. 
 
(1)  Essential righteousness.  
 
God is intrinsically “righteous” (Ex. 9:27; Deut. 32:4; Job 4:17; Ezra 9:15; Ps. 
129:), though this attribute has its active manifestation (Ps. 145:17; Dan. 9:24). 
 
(2)  Required righteousness.  
 
God demands righteousness from man that conforms to His own righteousness, 
and  the  law  is  a  transcript  of  this  expectation  (Deut,  7:9;  12-13).  This 
requirement is for perfect, total, everlasting righteousness. Man is to respond 
with righteous, active obedience (Ps. 4:5).  
 
                                            
5
  Gordon Rupp, The Righteousness of God, p. 127. 
6
  Introduction, p. 1. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
28 
(3)  Judicial righteousness. 
 
God maintains His righteousness in the economy of mankind, and while it is 
remunerative (Deut. 7:9, 12-13; Ps. 58:11), the pervasiveness of sin makes it 
more distinctively condemning (Lev. 19:15; Deut. 16:20; I Kings 10:9; Ps. 7:11-
16; Jer. 22:3). 
 
(4)  Saving righteousness.  
   
 The predicament of sinful man finds relief in God’s saving righteousness, that is 
a righteous way of saving unrighteous man.  
 
(a)  In Genesis 15:5 concerning Abraham (Rom. 4:1-5, 9-25), and Habakkuk 
2:4 as quoted in this verse, we are told of righteous standing that comes 
from God to sinners through work’s-excluding faith. 
 
(b)  Further, David cries out to God, “In Thy righteousness deliver me” (Ps. 
31:1;  cf.  71:2).  However  Isaiah,  notably  in  the  second  division  of  his 
prophecy,  gives  repeated  emphasis  to  “saving  righteousness”  for 
unrighteous  sinners  (Is.  45:8;  46:12-13;  51:5-8;  56:1;  59:16-17;  61:10; 
62:1).
7
 In these instances we have described the righteous, saving activity of 
God. 
 
b.  “Righteousness” in the New Testament epistles of Paul.  
 
It is to be expected that Paul adheres to the Old Testament categories of this term. 
Here  it  is  obvious  that  the  apostle  is  focusing  attention  upon  God’s  “saving 
righteousness.” But specifically what meaning does he have in mind here?  
 
(1)  The context of Habakkuk 2:4 and Romans 4:1-5, 9-25, and the vital role here 
of  “faith  alone,”  indicate  that  in  the  gospel,  God  has  provided  a  righteous 
standing, a “gift of righteousness” (5:17; Phil. 3:8-9). Thus “the righteousness of 
God”  is  that  judicial  provision  of  an  objective  righteousness  which  He,  the 
righteous God finds acceptable. In other words, the believing sinner, through 
faith, receives an alien, substitute, satisfactory righteousness. 
 
(2)  Illustration. Charles Hodge comments: “The righteousness of God, therefore, 
which  the  gospel  reveals,  and  by  which  we  are  constituted  righteous,  is  the 
perfect righteousness of Christ which completely meets and answers all of the 
demands of that law to which all men are subject, and which all have broken.”
8
 
 
(3)  Illustration. Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments: “The ultimate end and objective of 
the Christian gospel is to answer the question that was propounded by Job long 
centuries ago: ‘How shall a man be just with God?’ That is what it comes to. 
The business of the gospel is to make us righteous in the sight of God, to make 
us acceptable with God, to enable us to stand in the presence of God. Now you 
                                            
7
  Murray, Romans, I, pp. 344-5. 
8
  Charles Hodge, Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, p. 32. 
THEME - THE GOSPEL OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD 
 
29
may have comfortable feelings, you may have had marvelous experiences, you 
may have had a great change in your life, and a number of wrong things may 
have gone out of your life, but I say that unless you have got something that 
enables you to stand before God, now, and in the day of judgment, you are not 
only not a Christian, you have never understood the gospel. This is the central 
purpose of the gospel - to make a man just with God, to enable us to stand with 
righteousness in the presence of God.”
9
 
 
(4)  The context of Romans 3:21-22, 25-26 indicates that in the gospel, God actively 
saves  with  integrity;  He  is  both  a  just  and  a  justifying  God.  Thus  “the 
righteousness of God” is that display or “revelation” as here of His holy mercy, 
His just forgiveness, His righteous grace, His virtuous love. It is a righteousness 
that satisfies God’s moral requirements and enables grace to abound.  
 
(5)  Concerning the above two perspectives, Moo makes the following comment of 
reconciliation: “Could we not take ‘righteousness of God’ here to include both 
God’s activity of ‘making right’ saving, vindicating - and the status of those who 
are so made right, in a relational sense that bridges the divine and the human?”
10
  
 
2.  How is the righteousness of God “revealed from faith to faith”?  
 
 A literal translation here declares that this gospel of the righteousness of God, “is being 
revealed [uncovered/unveiled] out of [from] faith into [to] faith.”  
 
a.  Note  the  parallel  with  v.  18  where  the  wrath  of  God  is  being  “revealed  [actively 
poured  out/inflicted]  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of 
men.” It is now more than a “promised” gospel, v. 2. Hence, just as God’s wrath is 
being actively outpoured on account of righteous necessity, so God’s gospel of free 
grace  is  being  actively  showered  upon  Jew  and  Greek  on  account  of  righteous, 
universal compassion.  
 
b.  “From faith to faith” has been variously interpreted, but it is related to the continuity 
of “everyone who is believing (present participle)” in v. 16, and “the righteous man 
shall live [emphasis added] by faith,” v. 17.  
 
(1)  It is speaking, not so much of progress as continuity in faith. Having been saved 
by initial faith, the genuine saved sinner continues to believe; in this earthly life 
he shall be continually justified by faith; his shall be the life of faith (II Cor. 
5:7).
11
  Habakkuk  2:4  describes  the  ongoing  faith  of  the  prophet  who  shall 
endure Assyrian captivity and national devastation (Hab. 3:17-18). For Paul, as 
salvation is initially by grace, so it is also continually by grace, as he makes so  
abundantly clear in Galatians 3:1-3; the same is true with regard to faith (Gal. 
2:20; 3:25-26; 6:14).  
                                            
9
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, pp. 300-1. 
10
  Douglas J. Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 74, also p. 75 for further explanation. 
11
  H. P. Liddon comments: “The Righteousness of God in Man dates from the act of faith which receives Jesus 
Christ, and tends to produce faith, ™ij p…stineis pistin, as a condition of its being continuously imparted. It is 
only given to the man who continues to believe.” Explanatory Analysis St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, p. 18. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
30 
(2)  The NIV translation here describes this gospel as being revealed “by faith from 
first to last.” Paul inclusively describes here “first” faith and “lasting” faith. 
Such a rather free rendering yet focuses on the heart of what Paul is declaring, 
namely that, as the German pietist Spenner states, “Faith in Christ, confidence 
in the grace of God in Christ, is the beginning of our salvation, and will remain 
its instrument to the end.”
12
  
 
 
D.  GOD’S GOSPEL IS UNIQUE, V. 17b.  
 
1.  It is confirmed in the Old Testament. 
 
As in Romans 4:1-25, where Genesis 15:6 and Psalms 32:1-2 are quoted to uphold the one 
saving gospel of justification through faith, so here Habakkuk 2:4 is referred to with the 
same purpose in mind.   
 
2.  It is claimed through the “faith alone” sola fide principle of Habakkuk 2:4. 
 
The prophet Habakkuk complained to the Lord, with much righteous indignation, that He 
appeared to have neglected the judgment of His backslidden people (Hab. 1:1-4). In reply, 
the  Lord  advises  Habakkuk  that  his  punishment  will  be  mediated  through  the  savage 
Assyrians, and when it comes it will astound him with its severity (1:5-11). Habakkuk 
expresses his dismay that God would use a pagan nation to inflict discipline on relatively 
less godless Israel. So he awaits the Lord’s response to his objection (1:12-2:1). Then the 
Lord replies that His plan is certain; yes, the Assyrians are proud and ungodly. However, 
for the true child of God, he will pass through such a trial on the basis of faith alone in His 
righteous dealings in this situation. That is, “the righteous [man] will live by [his] faith” 
(2:2-4).  Habakkuk’s  ultimate  understanding  of  this  principle  is  declared  in  Habakkuk 
3:16-19). 
 
a.  Habakkuk 2:4 is quoted three times in the New Testament, and on each occasion a 
distinctive nuance is given. Nevertheless, in all three instances, blessed holy union and 
acceptance with God is established and maintained through unalloyed faith in His 
saving and keeping.  
 
(1)  Romans 1:17. Here justification concerns the righteousness of God received by 
the unrighteous through faith in Christ. 
 
(2)  Galatians 3:11. Here justification concerns faith in Christ that totally excludes 
reliance upon the works of the law.  
 
(3)  Hebrews 10:38. Here justification concerns faith in Christ that is productive of 
endurance in the face of adversity.  
 
b.  However, Paul’s quotation of Habakkuk 2:4 here admits of two possible renderings, 
which Murray succinctly defines: “Are we to render the proposition, ‘The righteous 
by faith shall live’ or ‘The righteous shall live by faith’? Is the proposition to the effect 
                                            
12
  Cited by Lange and Fay, The Epistle of Paul to the Romans, p. 77. 
THEME - THE GOSPEL OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD 
 
31
that the righteous will live or to the effect of intimating how the righteous will live, 
namely by faith?”
13
 In more simple terms, is the emphasis to be place on “faith” or 
“live”? To ask this question is, in context, to immediately opt for stress on “faith,” as 
it relates to righteousness. Moo rightly concludes, “Of greatest significance is the way 
Paul in Rom. 1-8 consistently links faith with righteousness (cf. the summary in 5:1) 
and shows how ‘life’ is the product of that righteousness (cf. 5:18 and 8:10. These 
connections favor the translation ‘the one who is righteous by faith will live.’“
14
  
 
c.  Of course there is a danger here that, in giving “faith righteousness” the place of 
primary emphasis, the “living” as a result of this “faith righteousness” is lost sight of. 
Nothing could be further from Paul’s mind. So Luther gives balance here when he 
comments:  “The  meaning  of  this  passage  appears,  then,  to  be  as  follows:  the 
righteousness of God is entirely from faith, yet growth does not make it more real but 
only gives it greater clarity - according to II Cor. 3:18, and Ps. 84:7: ‘They shall go 
from strength to strength.’ And just so also ‘from faith to faith,’ by always believing 
more  and  more  strongly.”
15
  Thus  the  truly  justified  through  faith  alone,  those 
recipients of the free and perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ, are also made alive 
unto God so that they live through Him (6:11). The biblical Christian will be right 
with God and alive unto God (Tit. 3:5-7).  
 
3.  Illustration. A historical perspective is to be noted here since the essence of this verse is the 
very foundation of the post-medieval, western society that sprung, whatever its failings 
may be, from the Reformation with resulting light and liberation from religious tyranny 
and dark legalistic bondage. In devoting one whole chapter of his commentary to this verse 
under the heading of, “Martin Luther’s Text,” Boice concludes as follows: “Later in life 
Luther was to write many things about the doctrine of justification by faith, which he had 
learned from Romans 1:17. He would call it ‘the chief article from which all our other 
doctrines have flowed.’ He called it ‘the master and prince, the lord, the ruler and the judge 
over all kinds of doctrines.’ He said, “If the article of justification is lost, all Christian 
doctrine is lost at the same time.’ He argued, ‘It alone begets, nourishes, builds, preserves, 
and defends the church of God, and without it the church of God cannot exist for one 
hour.’ What a heritage! What a rebuke against the weak state of present-day Christianity! 
If  justification  by  faith  is  the  doctrine  by  which  the  church  stands  or  falls,  our 
contemporary declines are no doubt due to our failure to understand, appreciate, and live 
by this doctrine. The church of our day does not stand tall before the world. It bows to it. 
Christians are not fearless before ridicule. We flee from it. Is the reason not that we have 
never truly learned to stand before God in his righteousness?”
16
 
                                            
13
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 33. 
14
  Moo, Romans, p. 78. 
15
  Martin Luther, Lectures on Romans, p. 19. 
16
  Boice, Romans, I, p. 126. 
CHAPTER IV 
 
ROMANS 1:18-3:20 - THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN, 
THE BAD NEWS 
 
 
N Romans 1:18-3:20 we now enter into the most devastating unveiling of man in sin and God’s 
reaction  to  it  in  all  of  the  Bible.  Here  sin,  in  both  its  hideous  profundity  and  universal 
inclusiveness, is laid bare in all of its naked ugliness. Further, and even more disturbing for guilty 
mankind,  is  God’s  reaction  toward  sin  which  is  his  manifest  wrath;  He  is  not  passive  in  this 
regard, as if benignly disturbed, but positively angry. Why does Paul, with obvious aforethought, 
present such a reasoned exposure of the essential human malady? Because the glorious gospel of 
the saving righteousness of God is predicated upon the loathsome leprosy, the plague of plagues,
1
 
that so thoroughly infects the whole race of Adam. Good news presupposes bad news; salvation 
presupposes  being  lost;  mercy  presupposes  misery;  grace  presupposes  guilt;  and  saving 
righteousness presupposes unrighteousness. Martyn Lloyd-Jones describes the vital importance of 
this passage as follows:  
If you understand this section you will never be in difficulties as to why it was absolutely vital that 
the  Son  of  God  should  leave  heaven  and  be  born  as  a  babe,  be  born  under  the  law,  be  born  of  a 
woman and live life as He lived it, should go to the cross and die and be buried and rise again; you 
will  never  have  any  trouble  in  understanding  why.  But  if  you  are  not  clear  about  this  section,  well 
then, you will always be in trouble about the gospel itself - as many people are.
2
 
 
 
A.  THE GENTILES ARE THOROUGH SINNERS, 1:18-32 
 
The  distinction  commonly  made  of  Paul  addressing  the  Gentiles  as  sinners  in  1:18-32  and 
the  Jews  as sinners  in 2:1-3:8  holds  true,  though  not  absolutely,  for  the  following reasons. 
First,  in  writing  to  Rome,  Paul  appears  in  1:18-32  to  be  focusing  upon  Roman  paganism 
and depravity. Second, the expression “all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men” in v. 18 
appears  to  describe  a  universal  corruption.  Third,  as  Moo  points  out,  “the  knowledge  of 
God  rejected  by  those  depicted  in  1:18-32  comes  solely  through  ‘natural  revelation’  -  the 
evidences  of  God  in  creation  and,  perhaps,  the  conscience.  The  situation  with  Jews  is,  of 
course, wholly different, for Paul holds them responsible for the special revelation they have 
been given in the law (cf. 2:12-13, 17-29).”
3
 
 
1.  Wrath is upon the ungodly who abandon God, vs. 18-23. 
 
a.  An introduction to the “wrath of God.” 
 
(1)  “Wrath”  here  is  God’s  expressed  holy  displeasure  at  man’s  persistent  and 
escalating depravity; it is His reaction to deep-dyed and perverse unholiness. 
                                            
1
  The expression “plague of plagues,” is borrowed from the title of Puritan Ralph Venning’s penetrating work 
on the doctrine of sin first published in 1669.  
2
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, p. 315. 
3
  Douglas J. Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 97. 
I 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  33
In  Romans it  is  mostly the  wrath  of  God  referred  to  (2:5,  8;  3:5;  4:15;  5:9; 
9:22; 12:19; cf. also Eph. 2:3; 5:6; ; Col. 3:6; I Thess. 1:10; 5:9), except for 
one reference to the wrath of human government (13:4-5). Paul does write of 
man’s  wrath  (Eph.  4:31;  Col.  3:8;  I  Tim.  2:8).  Murray  declares:  “Wrath  is 
the  holy  revulsion  of  God’s  being  against  that  which  is  the  contradiction  of 
his holiness.”
4
 
 
(2)  Modern  theology,  as  represented  by  C.  H.  Dodd,  has  reacted  against  the 
thought of God being angry and indignant toward sinful man since it is said 
to  be  unworthy  of  the  New  Testament  revelation  of  the  love  of  God.  Old 
Testament expressions of the wrath of God (Num. 11:1; 25:4; Isa. 34:2; Jer. 
4:8;  51:45;  Zeph.  2:1-2)  merely  reflect  a  more  primitive  past.  Hence, 
“wrath” here is the inevitable consequence of sin, that is inbuilt punishment, 
1:27,  rather  than  a  divine  expression  of  hatred.
5
  Of  course  intrinsic  to  this 
aversion  to  the  obvious  teaching  of  Scripture  is  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
character  of  God,  which  gives  primacy  to  holiness  as  the  regulator  of  love. 
This  rationalization  of  the  “wrath  of  God”  in  fact  appears  to  be  a  vain 
attempt to escape from it.
6
  
 
(3)  But  does  God really  get  angry? Could  not  His  wrath  or  anger merely  be  an 
“anthropopathism,”  that  is  a  divine  accommodation  and  representation  of 
the ever-blessed God to a human emotional expression? And if God is truly 
angry,  then  how  is  it  possible  for  Him  to  be  loving  at  the  same  time?  Both 
questions  take  us  to  the  limits  of  human  understanding  and  the  danger  of 
Stoicism  on  one  hand  and  God  as  essentially  man  on  the  other.  However, 
consider: 
 
(a)  The  Bible  never  presents  God’s  anger  as  a  charade  covering  the  reality 
of non-anger. Shedd helpfully explains: 
Now  when  the  emotion  of  anger  in  a  most  pure  spirit  like  God  comes 
into contact with moral evil, there is harmony between the feeling and its 
object.  It  is  a  righteous  feeling  spent  upon  a  wicked  thing.  When  God 
hates  what  is  hateful,  and  is  angry  at  that  which  merits  wrath,  the  true 
nature  and  fitness  of  things  is  observed,  and  he  feels  in  himself  that 
inward  satisfaction  which  is  the  substance  of  happiness.  .  .  . The  feeling 
of  wrath  against  the  wickedness  of  man  and  devils,  is  constantly  in  the 
Divine essence. Yet God is supremely and constantly blessed.
7
 
                                            
4
  John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 35. 
5
  Leon Morris comments: “It is of course true that God is love. But it is not true that this rules out any realistic 
view of God’s wrath. We must bear in mind that the opposite of love is not wrath, but hate. Wrath is perhaps 
not an ideal term, for with us it so easily comes to denote an emotion characterized by loss of self-control and 
a violent concern for selfish interests. But these are not necessary constituents of wrath, and both are absent 
from  the  “righteous  indignation” which gives  us  the  best  human  analogy.  In  any  case, “wrath”  is  the word 
the Bible uses, and we need the strongest of reasons for abandoning it . It is a term that expresses the settled 
and active opposition of God’s holy nature to everything that is evil.” The Epistle to the Romans, p. 76.  
6
  R. C. H. Lenski adds: “This fact of the wrath “from heaven” constantly breaks through the clouds of human 
perversions,  false  reasonings  and  philosophies,  blatant  denials  and  lies,  beneath  which  men  seek  to  hide  in 
helpless efforts to escape.” The Interpretation of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, p. 94. 
7
  William Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, I, pp. 177-78. See also John Gill, Body of Divinity, pp. 67-72. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  34 
(b)  The Bible often describes God as both holy and gracious (Is. 6:1-7), just 
and a justifier concerning sin (Rom. 3:26), and here in Romans 1:16-18 
He  saves  sinners  while  at  the  same  time  being  angry  with  sinners. 
Robert  Dabney  illustrates  this  true  biblical  dualism  from  the  life  of 
George Washington who, in determining the destiny of a Major Andre, 
both loved him and signed his death-warrant.
8
   
 
(4)  Application. Arthur Pink writes: 
A  study  of  the  concordance  will  show  that  there  are  more  references  in 
Scripture to the anger, fury, and wrath of God, than there are to His love and 
tenderness. . . . The wrath of God is a perfection of the Divine character upon 
which  we  need  to  frequently  meditate.  First,  that  our  hearts  may  be  duly 
impressed by God’s detestation of sin. We are ever prone to regard sin lightly, 
to  gloss  over  its  hideousness,  to  make  excuses  for  it.  But  the  more  we  study 
and  ponder  God’s  abhorrence  of  sin  and  His  frightful  vengeance  upon  it,  the 
more likely we are to realize its heinousness. Secondly, to beget a true fear in 
our  souls  for  God:  ‘let  us  have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably 
with  reverence  and  godly  fear:  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire’  (Heb.  12:28-
29).  We  cannot  serve  Him  ‘acceptably’  unless  there  is  due  ‘reverence’  for  His 
awful  Majesty  and  ‘godly  fear’  of  His  righteous  anger;  and  these  are  best 
promoted  by  frequently  calling  to  mind  that  ‘our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.’ 
Thirdly, to draw out our souls in fervent praise for our having been delivered 
from  ‘the  wrath  to  come’  (I  Thess.  1:10).  Our  readiness  or  our  reluctance  to 
meditate  upon  the  wrath  of  God  becomes  a  sure  test  of  our  hearts’  true 
attitude toward Him.
9
 
 
b.  The revelation of the wrath of God, v. 18a. 
 
A  more  literal  translation  here  reads,  “For  being  revealed  [uncovered,  cf.  Luke 
12:2, emphatic position] is the wrath of God.” The present tense here forces us to 
focus on the present rather than that future apocalyptic revelation of the wrath of 
God  when  Jesus  Christ  returns  (II  Thess.  1:3-10;  Rev.  612-17;  19:11-21).  A 
futuristic present is possible here, cf. Matt. 26:2, but unlikely in view of the present 
emphasis  of  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  in  v.  17.  But  how  is  the  wrath  of  God 
being presently revealed? 
 
(1)  Lloyd-Jones  suggests  six  ways  in  which  God’s  wrath  is  presently  being 
uncovered, namely: 1, in human conscience, its troubling, accusatory nature; 
2,  sin’s  inbuilt  punishment;  3,  a  cursed,  savage  creation;  4,  universal  and 
inevitable  death;  5,  history,  both  biblical  and  general,  the  course  of  human 
degeneration;  6,  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.
10
  Two  of  these  seem  to  be 
most significant. 
 
(2)  Sin  has  inbuilt  punishment;  that  is,  whatever  pleasure  may  be  offered  in 
temptation,  yet  bitter  and  unavoidable  consequences  follow.  This  seems,  in 
                                            
8
  Robert Dabney, Discussions: Evangelical and Theological, I, pp. 284-5. 
9
  Arthur Pink, The Attributes of God, pp. 84-5. 
10
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, pp. 342-50. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  35
context  here,  to  be  of  prime  importance  to  Paul  where,  in  v.  27,  men  and 
women  involved  in  unnatural  sexual  relationships,  are  “receiving  in  their 
own persons the due penalty of their error.” Surely this retribution includes 
disease as well as an evil, unclean, depraved environment. Further, this wrath 
involves  God’s  abandonment  of  gross  sinners  in  vs.  24-32.  As  Thomas 
Manton writes: 
It may be the greatest expression of God’s anger, if he doth not check us and 
suffer us to go on in our sins: Hosea 4:17, ‘Ephraim is joined to idols, let him 
alone;’ word, providence, conscience, let him alone: Ps. 81:12, ‘So I gave them 
up to their own hearts’ lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. It is the 
greatest misery of all to be left to our own choices
11
  
God  designs  that  the  ungodly  man  will  fall  into  a  pit  that  his  hands  have 
hollowed out (Ps. 7:12-16). 
 
(3)  Concurrently  with  the  revelation  of  God’s  gospel  is  the  revelation  of  His 
wrath.  For  true  believers,  God’s  wrath,  by  way  of  substitution,  was  poured 
out upon His Son (Is. 53:6, 10; Matt. 27:45-46). For unbelievers who spurn 
the gospel, “the wrath of God is abiding [present tense] on him” (John 3:36). 
Haldane comments: “Above all, the wrath of God was revealed from heaven 
when the Son of God came down to manifest the Divine character, and when 
that  wrath  was  displayed  in  His  sufferings  and  death,  in  a  manner  more 
awful than by all the tokens God had before given of His displeasure against 
sin.”
12
 
 
c.  The reasons for the wrath of God, vs. 18b-23. 
 
Immediately following the sin of Adam and Eve, we are told that “they heard the 
sound of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the man 
and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God [emphasis added] 
among  the  trees  of  the  garden”  (Gen.  3:8).  As  a  result  of  this  disobedience,  God 
revealed  his  anger  through punishment  and  the  expulsion  of  Adam and  Eve  from 
the garden. In simple terms, sin causes man to flee from God who in turn responds 
with anger. Yet in the midst of God’s wrath there was the promise of redemption 
(Gen. 3:15). So here, man’s perverse flight from God is graphically revealed, yet at 
the  same  time  this  revelation  of  wrath  is  the  precursor  to  His  saving,  righteous 
grace. 
 
(1)  God in truth is suppressed, vs. 18-19. 
 
On  the  surface,  man’s  problem  is  described  as  “ungodliness,”  ¢sšbeia,   
asebe¯ia,  or  active  assault  on  God’s  person,  and  “unrighteousness”  ¢d…kia, 
adikia,  or  active  assault  upon  God’s  moral  order.  However,  these  are  but 
symptoms  of  a  more  basic  problem,  that  is  rejection  of  “the  truth”  (John 
3:19).  The  embrace  of  truth  has  moral  consequences.  It  is  truth  or  error 
embraced that governs a man’s lifestyle (John 8:32).    
                                            
11
  Thomas Manton, Works, XIII, p. 300. 
12
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 64. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  36 
(a)  It is evident truth about God, v. 18. 
 
1)  What  specifically  is  this  truth  that  man  spurns?  Clearly  it  centers 
on  the  God  of  the  Bible,  as  revealed  to  inward  Gentile/pagan 
consciousness by means of the external created order, v. 19-20. 
 
2)  It  is  truth  that  is  arresting,  that  addresses  man’s  soul  and  finds 
resistance.  Morris  comments:  “Paul  evidently  thinks  of  truth  as 
dynamic, for it can be hindered, which means that it must be doing 
something.”
13
 
 
3)  It is truth that frustrated man attempts to “suppress,” or hinder, or 
sit  upon.  Here  man’s  claims  to  fairly  distinguish  truth  are 
demolished  because  sin  renders  man  warped,  prejudiced  toward 
unrighteousness. In context, this “suppression” is especially in the 
religious and moral spheres of life.  
 
4)  Illustration.  Consider  the  following  contemporary  religious/moral 
issues.  In  every  instance  the  world  scoffs  at  the  plain  biblical 
teaching. 
 
a)  Evolution. Creations is mocked as unenlightened, rather than 
the acknowledgment of a faithful Creator (Ps. 19:1). 
 
b)  Abortion. The unborn child is fetal tissue, not woven by God 
in the womb (Ps. 139:13-14). 
 
c)  Divorce.  A  lifetime  union  is  an  old-fashioned  concept  that 
does not allow for modern pressures; what matters is personal 
feelings rather than loyalty (Matt. 19:6). 
 
d)  Deviant  sexuality.  Heterosexuality  is  passe;  any  sexual 
relationship  is  legitimate  provided  it  is  loving  and  does  not 
harm others (Rom. 1:24-32). 
 
e)  Liberal  Christianity.  Meaning,  especially  in  the  Bible,  is 
subjective, existential, culturally conditioned, that which suits 
the times (Matt. 22:29).  
 
5)  Application.  How  important  it  is  in  evangelism  and  personal 
witnessing  to  be  aware  of  this  characteristic  of  man,  of  whatever 
educational level. The more educated or cultured a person may be, 
the more sophisticated becomes the suppression.  
 
 
 
 
                                            
13
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 78. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  37
(b)  It is evident truth from God, v. 19. 
 
For what reasons is man accountable concerning the knowledge of God 
which he suppresses according to v. 18? Why is it just that the wrath of 
God  is  outpoured  upon  ungodliness  and unrighteousness?  It  is  because 
man  been  given  a  sufficient  revelation  of  God  so  that  he  cannot  plead 
ignorance or agnosticism, and thus is “without excuse,” v. 20b. 
 
1)  This knowledge about God is evident “within them.” 
 
a)  While  the  context  of  v.  20  suggests  that  this  knowledge  is 
about  the  external  created  order,  yet  internal  consciousness, 
cf. 2:14-15, seems the primary intent. Man is a creature with 
observatory  powers,  so  that  certain  truth  about  God  is 
evidently  discernable;  it  inescapably  confronts  him,  is 
acknowledged  within,  and  then  suppressed.  Here  is  the  root 
of  man’s  “futile  speculation”  and  “foolishness  of  heart,”  v. 
21b. 
 
b)  Illustration.  Calvin  comments:  “Men  cannot  open  their  eyes 
without being compelled to see him. . . . Upon his individual 
works  he  has  engraved  unmistakable  marks  of  his  glory,  so 
clear  and  so  prominent  that  even  unlettered  and  stupid  folk 
cannot plead the excuse of ignorance.”
14
 
 
c)  Application. This is a vital point with regard to witnessing to 
a  person  who  professes  agnosticism  or  atheism,  which 
response is in fact willful suppression. Lloyd-Jones comments:  
Anthropologists  and  research  workers  who  have  investigated 
this problem have produced this very vital bit of evidence: the 
most  primitive  tribes  amongst  the  pygmies  in  the  heart  of 
Africa,  tribes  like  the  aborigines  in  Australia,  and  in  certain 
parts  of  the  north-west  of  the  American  Continent,  wherever 
you  find  the  most  primitive  people  imaginable,  even  there  is 
found  this  sense  of  a  supreme  Being,  of  a  supreme  God.  It  is 
universal  in  human  nature.  Even  the  man  who  tells  you  that 
he does not believe in God, and who boasts in the fact that he 
is an atheist, even he has got a sense of God. He has to argue 
against  it,  and  that  is  why  he  does  so.  Whether  he  likes  it  or 
not,  he  has  got  it,  and  he  does  his  best  to  drown  it  and  to 
ridicule  it  and  to  dismiss  it,  but  it  is  still  there.  A  universal 
sense of God - ‘that which may be known of God is manifest 
in them’, deep within the consciousness of man’s being.
15
 
                                            
14
  John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, I, V. 1. 
15
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, p. 369. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  38 
Of course such “God-consciousness” is not comprehensive or 
saving,
16
 though it is sufficient to condemn man in his godless 
manner of living and pagan worship.  
 
2)  This knowledge is from God “to them.” 
 
a)  Of  prime  importance  are  the  questions,  “Does  man  discover 
God?”  (Paul  everywhere  answers  “No”),  and  “Does  God 
reveal  Himself  to  man?”  (Paul  everywhere  as  well  as  here 
answers “Yes”). Morris comments: “God can be known only 
as  he  chooses  to  make  himself  known.  The  initiative  is  with 
him.”
17
 
 
b)  In I Corinthians 1:21 Paul reveals that “the world through its 
wisdom  did  not  come  to  know  God,”  that  is  the  world,  by 
means of its strenuous searching and scholastic endeavor, was 
not able to come to a true and saving knowledge of God. On 
the  other  hand,  Paul  continues,  “God  was  well-pleased 
through the foolishness of the message preached to save those 
who  believe.”  Such  true  knowledge  and  saving  knowledge 
was  revealed  by  God  through  the  Gospel  and  its  appointed 
heralds, cf. Gal. 1:11-12; 4:4; Eph. 1:9; II Tim. 1:8-11. 
 
c)  Hence,  man’s  received  God-consciousness  and  God’s 
revelation  of  Himself  in  creation  are  His  communication  of 
Himself  that,  unlike  man’s  perverted  conception,  is  wholly 
authentic.  So  Haldane  adds  that,  “there  is  no  one  who  can 
manifest  God  to  man  except  Himself,  and  consequently  that 
all we know of Him must be founded on His own revelation, 
and not on the authority of any creature.”
18
 When man does 
attempt  to  discover  God,  he  arrives  at  those  conceptions 
described in v. 23, namely “an image [of God] in the form of 
corruptible  man  and  of  birds  and  of  birds  and  four-footed 
animals and crawling creatures.” 
 
(2)  God in creation is denied, v. 20. 
 
Specifically,  what  is  this  evident  knowledge  about  God  that  confronts  all 
men,  without  exception,  in  their  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness,  as 
mentioned in v. 19? Clearly the challenge of man, “Show me God and I will 
believe,” is untenable, that is its intimation that God is not evident.  
 
 
                                            
16
  “It would probably be a fair paraphrase of his [Paul’s] argument to say that people have never lived up to the 
highest  and  best  that  they have  known. But  God  intends that  they  should.  They  are  guilty  in his  eyes  when 
they do not.”  Morris, Romans, pp. 78-79. 
17
  Ibid., p. 80. 
18
  Haldane, Romans, p. 66. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  39
(a)  His invisible essential attributes, v. 20a. 
 
To  begin  with,  God  is  described  as  being  essentially  invisible.  His 
fundamental  attributes  transcend  visible  definition  (Ex.  33:20;  John 
1:18;  6:46;  I  Tim.  6:16;  I  John  4:12),  and  here  they  are  described  as 
“His  invisible  things  [attributes],”  more  specifically  “His  eternal 
power” (infinite sovereignty and omnipotence) and “divine nature” (full 
deity). 
 
(b)  His visible expressed attributes, v. 20b. 
 
1)  Yet  Paul  declares  a  paradox  when  he  further  explains  that  the 
invisible God is clearly seen. How can this be? The answer is that 
while  God  in  essence  is  not  seen,  yet  that  expression  of  his 
attributes  in  creation  is  a  most  visible  display  of  His  person.  As 
Calvin  plainly  states,  “God  is  in  himself  invisible;  but  as  his 
majesty shines forth in his works and in his creatures everywhere, 
men ought  in  these  to  acknowledge  him,  for  they  clearly  set  forth 
their Maker.”
19
   
 
2)  Psalm  19:1-6  presents  a  similar  paradox.  The  creation  of  God 
“tells”  and  “declares,”  v.  1;  it  “pours  forth  speech”  and  “reveals 
knowledge,”  v.  2;  yet,  “there  is  no  speech,  nor  are  there  words; 
their voice is not heard,” v. 3. Hence the Psalmist is describing the 
deafening  proclamation  of  the  silent  heavens.  As  Spurgeon  notes, 
“Sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  God’s  traveling  preachers;  they  are 
apostles upon their journey confirming those who regard the Lord, 
and judges on circuit condemning those who worship idols.”
20
 
 
3)  Since  the  creation  of  the  world,  even  before  the  Fall,  God’s 
expressed glory has been “clearly seen” in that same creation. It is 
not  a  dimly  perceived  vista,  but  a  brilliant  display  that  even  now 
shines  through  even  the  disorder  that  corruption  had  brought 
about. However, it is a clarity with limitation, for this revelation is 
not  of  saving  grace,  but  transcendent  greatness  and  intricate 
design.  
 
(c)  His visible obligating attributes, v. 20c. 
 
As  a  consequence,  man,  as  described  in  v.  18,  is  without  excuse.  The 
assumption  here  is  that  man  denies  the  force  of  this  general  revelation 
by  offering  countless  reasons  for  his  godless  lifestyle;  but  this  denial  is 
unreasonable,  irrational,  and  the  greatest  foolishness.  In  spite  of  these 
excuses, God denies their validity in the light of the evidence in creation 
                                            
19
  John Calvin, Epistle to the Romans, p. 70. 
20
  C. H. Spurgeon, Treasury of David, I, p. 306. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  40 
alone.
21
 Here then we are led to consider in the verses that follow man’s 
innate hatred of God which causes him to oppose the most compelling 
evidence and perversely deny the natural order of things (Isa. 5:20).  
 
(3)  God in the heart is renounced, v. 21. 
 
We now commence a descent into the vortex of the heart of sinful man. The 
rebellious  rejection  of  evidence  in  v.  20  leads  us  to  enquire  as  to  what  is  at 
the root of this problem. It is more profound in its dark complexity that we 
could possibly imagine. Man is not merely in a state of denial, but rather he 
militantly  opposes  God  at  every  hand  (Ps.  2:1-3).  Jonathan  Edwards  has  a 
significant  sermon  on  this  matter  entitled,  “Men  Naturally  Are  God’s 
enemies” in which he declares: 
[Men]  are  enemies  in  the  natural  relish  of  their  souls.  They  have  an  inbred 
distaste  and  disrelish  of  God’s  perfections.  God  is  not  such  a  being  as  they 
would  have.  Though  they  are  ignorant  of  God;  yet  from  what  they  hear  of 
him, and  from  what  is  manifest  by  the  light  of  nature  [emphasis  added],  they 
do not like him. By his being endowed with such attributes as he is, they have 
an  aversion  to  him.  They  hear  God  is  an  infinitely  holy,  pure,  and  righteous 
Being, and they do not like him upon this account; they have no relish of such 
qualifications: they take no delight in contemplating them. It would be a mere 
task, a bondage to a natural man, to be obliged to set himself to contemplate 
those attributes of God. They see no manner of beauty or loveliness, nor taste 
any  sweetness,  in  them.  And  on  account  of  their  distaste  of  these  perfections, 
they dislike all his other attributes. They have great aversion to him because he 
is  omniscient  and  knows  all  things;  and  because  his  omniscience  is  a  holy 
omniscience. They are not pleased that he is omnipotent, and can do whatever 
he  pleases;  because  it  is  a  holy  omnipotence.  They  are  enemies  even  to  his 
mercy,  because  it  is  a  holy  mercy.  They  do  not  like  his  immutability,  because 
by this he will never be otherwise than he is, an infinitely holy God.
22
  
 
(a)  Through increasing dishonor, v. v. 21a 
 
Here  is  an  expansion  upon  the  thought  of  man’s  inexcusability. 
“Knowing  God  [through  the  witness  of  creation],  they  did  not  glorify 
[honor]  Him  as  God.”  Thus  there  is  a  vast  gulf  between  the 
acknowledgment  of  God  and  love  for  God;  He  calls  for  praise  and 
esteem,  not  grudging  patronage.  Yet  to  first  concede  that  God  is,  and 
then  attempt  to  contrive  denial  of  Him,  is  to  grossly  insult  Him;  it  is 
“ingratitude”  as  Paul  here  states  ,  concerning  our  being  and  the  world 
around us, of the highest order. It is like a child attempting to deny his 
known  parentage  and  resultant  upbringing.  Lloyd-Jones  writes:  “Man 
does  not  thank  God  for  His  mercy,  for  His  goodness,  for  all  His 
dealings  with  us  in  providence.  We  take  the  sunshine  for  granted;  we 
are annoyed if we do not get it. We take the rain for granted. . . . He is 
‘the  Father  of  mercies’;  and  yet  people  go  through  the  whole  of  their 
                                            
21
  Refer to James Montgomery Boice, Romans, I, pp. 153-60, where he deals with many common excuses such 
as lack of evidence, the heathen, the truthfulness of the Bible, the problem of evil, etc.  
22
  Jonathan Edwards, Works, II, p. 131. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  41
lives  and  they  never  thank  Him;  they  ignore  Him  completely.  That  is 
how  they  show  their  attitude  towards  God.  In  this  way  they  suppress 
the truth that has been revealed concerning God.”
23
 
 
(b)  Through futile speculations, v. 21b. 
 
Man’s  condemnation  here  is  heightened  when  it  is  understood  that  he 
“reasons”  or  “speculates,”  albeit  vainly,  so  that  the  God  of  Scripture 
might be dethroned. In other words, with premeditation, man purposely 
distances himself from God. This he does by means of philosophic and 
abstract  metaphysical  reasoning.  So  Edwards  declares:  “The  natural 
tendency of the heart of man is to fly from God, and keep at a distance 
from him, as far off as possible.”
24
 This attitude was evident when man 
determined to eliminate the Son of God and thus gain his “inheritance” 
(Luke 20:14; cf. John 1:10). 
 
(c)  Through darkening foolishness, v. 21c. 
 
Foolish speculation leads to darkness which man finds acceptable. This 
fellowship  in  darkness  leads  to  a  pursuit  for  increasing  degrees  of 
darkness,  as  the  following  context  suggests.  Confronted  with  the  light, 
man  prefers  darkness  (John  3:19;  cf.  Eph.  4:17-19).  Of  course  to  such 
men,  this  darkness  is  light,  and  therefore  the  most  intense  and  binding 
darkness (Matt. 6:23; John 9:41). 
 
(4)  God in glory is debased, vs. 22-23. 
 
More specifically, how was God dishonored by means of foolish speculation 
according to v. 21? This raises the perspective of God by the Apostle Paul as 
being  honorable,  that  is  glorious  in  incorruption,  or  in  a  word,  holy.  Thus 
man degraded God to an unholy level, as was the case when Israel sinned at 
the foot of Mount Sinai, in His very presence (Ex. 32:1-10). 
 
(a)  His glory is exchanged for foolishness, v. 22. 
 
1)  “Asserting  [themselves]  to  be  wise”  describes  man  as  promoting 
his  cleverness  in  the  realm  of  theology,  as  he  distances  himself 
from God. 
 
a)  Through humanistic philosophy and arrogant scholarship. 
 
b)  Through progressive, evolutionary, cultural elitism. 
 
c)  Through rhetoric, oratory, and clever reasoning. 
 
                                            
23
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 1:1-32, p. 382. 
24
  Edwards, Works, II, p. 131. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  42 
d)  Illustration. Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments:  
Instead of accepting revelation they became philosophers. And 
what is a philosopher? A philosopher is a man who starts by 
being skeptical about everything. That he is an agnostic. ‘I am 
going to have the data’, he says, ‘and then I am going to apply 
my mind to it. I am going to reason it out and I am going to 
work  it  out’.  And  that  is  exactly  what  such  men  have  done; 
they  became  foolish  and  wicked  in  their  reasonings,  in  their 
thoughts,  in  their  own  conjectures  and  speculations  and 
surmisings.
25
  
And  surely  liberal  theology  and  much  of  modern  biblical 
criticism have been but children of this movement. 
 
2)  Yet  in  this  boasted  man-made  advance  comes  the  opposite  result, 
that  is  man-made  foolishness  or  ungodliness.  The  word  mwra…nw, 
mo¯ raino¯ , here is used in Matthew 5:13 of salt losing its savor, and 
in  I  Corinthians  1:20  of  God  making  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this 
world. However here it is man making a fool of himself.  
 
3)  Application.  Man  became  like  Esau,  skillful  in  the  realm  of  the 
earthy,  yet  foolish  in  his  carnal  reasoning  that  cost  him  his 
birthright and disfavor with God (Gen. 25:27-34; Mal. 1:2-3; Heb. 
12:16-17).  
 
(b)  His incorruption is exchanged for corruption, v. 23. 
 
In  view  of  Paul’s  exalted  understanding  of  God,  the  extent  of  man’s 
foolishness  is  now  described  as  seemingly  incomprehensible,  the  height 
of  madness,  involving  the  most  irrational  transaction  in  the  history  of 
the human race.  
 
1)  The only true and living creator God. 
 
Paul  speaks  of  “the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God,”  which 
confession is pregnant with transcendent and holy meaning (I Tim. 
1:17; 6:14-16). 
 
a)  His glory.  
 
This  dÒxa,  doxa,  describes  the  weight  of  magnificence  of 
God’s person, that is the fulness of His attributes.   
 
b)  His incorruption. 
 
Focus is brought upon His righteous and undefiled character, 
or His holiness, so worthy of reverence and admiration.  
                                            
25
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 1:1-32, p. 377. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  43
2)  The hierarchy of created beings. 
 
There  seems  to  be  a  descending  order  here  whereby  man  is 
portrayed  as  increasingly  degenerate;  he  plumbs  the  depths  of 
corrupt  worship  seeking  ever  more  novel  ways  of  debauched 
religion.  This  plunge  of  mankind  may  also  be  reflected  in 
architecture,  music,  art,  literature,  etc.,  though  the  focus  here  is 
upon religion.   
 
a)  Man. 
 
His  worship  of  “an  image  in  the  firm  of  corruptible  man”  is 
but  subtle  self-worship,  especially  evident  in  Greek  and 
Roman  idolatrous  human  imagery.  In  worshiping  works  of 
human  representation  made  by  his  hands,  man  in  fact 
worships  his  own  sinful  image  in  his  desire  for  non-
threatening religion; his creativity here is sinful artistry. 
 
b)  Animals. 
 
Birds, the ibis; quadrupeds, the bull, cat, cow, hippopotamus, 
wolf;  crawling  creatures,  the  crocodile,  snake,  scarab  (dung) 
beetle. 
 
3)  The incredible trade-off. 
 
The  realm  of  the  absurd  is  now  entered  whereby  man  trades 
wealth  for  rubbish,  beauty  for  ashes,  truth  for  error,  light  for 
darkness.  Man  attempts  to  divorce  God,  to  force  His  abdication, 
and establish his own reign (Ps. 2:1-3). 
 
a)  The example of Israel.  
 
God’s people exchanged a cast metal calf for their saving God 
(Ps. 106:19-21), a fountain of living water for broken cisterns 
(Jer. 2:11-13), the Son of God for thirty pieces of silver (Zech. 
11:12-13; Matt. 27:3-10). 
 
b)  The exchange of God for man.  
 
Robert Mounce comments:  
The  essential  sin  which  gives  rise  to  idolatry  is  selfishness. 
When  a  man  creates  his  own  god  he  can  control  it.  It  exists 
for his own pleasure and profit. This sort of god requires from 
him  no  particular  standard  of  ethical  or  moral  behavior.  To 
worship  an  idol  is  ultimately  to  worship  oneself.  Idolatry  is 
self-deification. Disguised as a religious exercise, idolatry finds 
wide  approval  as  an  acceptable  form  of  worship.  It  debases  
 
 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  44 
because  it  obscures  the  revealed  purpose  of  God  and  leads 
man to the blind conclusion that he can worship himself as a 
viable substitute.
26
 
 
2.  Wrath is upon the ungodly who God abandons, vs. 24-32. 
 
Whereas  vs.  20-23  describe  man’s  active  and  persistent  rebellion  against  general 
revelation  in  creation,  now  God’s  response  is  described  in  a  three-fold  declaration  of 
His  “handing  over”  of  sinful  mankind  to  the  fulfillment  of  unbridled  desires.  Such 
abandonment is reminiscent of God’s “handing over” of Israel to its lusting for exotic 
food  in  the  wilderness  (Num.  11:1-34,  especially  vs.  18-20).  Notice  that  in  all  three 
instances, vs. 24, 26, 28, outward sinful actions originate from lustful hearts, degrading 
passions, depraved minds. 
 
a.  God abandons the ungodly to their lustful hearts, vs. 24-25. 
 
There is a judicial and punitive sense involved here. God delivers men in sin over 
to punishment by means of the affliction of their own sin (Ps. 7:12-16). For man, 
he discovers that the supposed sweetness of his sin turns to bitterness; his pleasure 
becomes  a  gnawing  cancer.  John  Murray  comments:  “God’s  displeasure  is 
expressed  in  his  abandonment  of  the  persons  concerned  to  more  intensified  and 
aggravated  cultivation  of  the  lusts  of  their  own  hearts  with  the  result  that  they 
reap for themselves a correspondingly greater toll of retributive vengeance.”
27
 
 
(1)  Abandonment to carnal corruption, v. 24. 
 
(a)  Defilement  by  means  of  sexual  perversion,  lewd  revelry,  and  cultic 
prostitution seem to be indicated here. It is as if mankind, not at peace 
in his sinning because of God’s troubling of his conscience, says “Leave 
me  alone;  let  me  indulge  my  sin  undisturbed;  cease  from  convicting 
me.”  To  this  God  eventually  responds,  “All  right,  I  will  abandon  you, 
confront you no more, and withdraw the offer of grace.” 
 
(b)  Notice that here we deal with lusting in the realm of the natural order, 
the misuse of revealed sexual functions; but in v. 26 we descend into the 
even  lower  regions  of  human  depravity,  that  is  the  invention  of 
unnatural functions, the reversal of God’s plan for the union of a man 
and a woman. 
 
(2)  Abandonment to creature worship, v. 25.   
 
(a)  Here we see how man’s perversity robs himself of objectivity; where the 
advancement  of  self  is  concerned,  truth  becomes  dispensable  and  error 
preferable.  Here  Paul  defines  man’s  devolution  rather  than  evolution, 
his decline into pantheistic humanism, which only the gospel can reverse 
(I  Thess.  1:9).  Man  arrogantly  prefers  the  worship  of  himself  and  the 
                                            
26
  Robert Mounce, Themes From Romans, p. 31. 
27
  Murray, Romans, I, pp. 44-45.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  45
gods of his own making rather than the worship of God, and when such 
self-idolatry  reaches  a  certain  extremity,  God  responds  as  He  did  with 
Israel,  “Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols;  let  him  alone”  (Hos.  4:17).  In  his 
desire for autonomy, God consigns man to the tyranny of human rule. 
While, “It is a terrifying thing to fall into the hands of the living God” 
(Heb.  10:31),  it  is  infinitely  worse  to  then  be  abandoned  by  that  same 
God.  
 
(b)  However,  Paul  cannot  allow  even  his  mere  mention  of  human 
defamation  of  the  great  Jehovah  to  stand  alone.  Rather,  by  way  of 
contrast, he must eulogize and praise the transcendent glory of God by 
calling Him “blessed,” eÙloghtÒj, euloge¯ tos, and “forever.” 
 
b.  God abandons the ungodly to sexual perversion, vs. 26-27. 
 
Here  Paul  does  not  merely  describe  another  category  of  sin,  but  rather  a 
plummeting of mankind into the deepest crevices of human corruption, that which 
is  unnatural,  the  reversal  of  natural  sexual  functions,  the  defiance  of  God’s 
creative  purposes.  In  general,  this  extremity  of  sinning  causes  God  to  abandon 
mankind  to  this  sewer  form  of  existence.  However,  this  is  not  to  deny  that  His 
mercy  reaches  down  even  to  such  perverted  depths,  as  the  Apostle  indicates  in  I 
Corinthians  6:9-11,  that  is  when  the  repentant  cry  is  like  that  which  Charles 
Wesley describes: 
Depth of mercy! Can there be 
Mercy still reserved for me? 
Can my God His wrath forbear? 
Me, the chief of sinners, spare? 
I have long withstood His grace, 
Long provoked Him to His face, 
Would not hearken to His calls, 
Grieved Him by a thousand falls. 
Pity from Thine eye let fall; 
By a look my soul recall; 
Now the stone of flesh convert, 
Cast a look, and break my heart. 
(1)  Abandonment to unnatural lesbianism, v. 26. 
 
(a)  Why  does  Paul  mention  women  first?  Charles  Hodge  answers:  “Paul 
first  refers  to  the  degradation  of  females  among  the  heathen,  because 
they are always the last to be affected in the decay of morals, and their 
corruption is therefore proof that all virtue is lost.”
28
  
 
(b)  The  Apostle  does  not  hesitate  to  describe  this  relationship  as  a 
“degrading passion,” that is a lustful attraction often mistakenly called 
love. Contrary to some modern opinions which give precedence to love 
                                            
28
  Charles Hodge, Commentary on The Epistle To The Romans, p. 42. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  46 
over  holiness  in  the  character  of  God,  such  homosexuality  is  illicit 
because it is first unholy and an inversion of the natural order of sexual 
relations. Further, it is an arrogant attempt by woman to turn from her 
dependance upon man. 
 
(2)  Abandonment to unnatural homosexuality, v. 27. 
 
(a)  There  may  be  the  inference  here  that  man  neglectfully  turned  from  his 
loving  headship  role  over  woman  (Eph.  5:25)  with  the  result  that 
woman turned to woman. 
 
(b)  Elsewhere in the Bible homosexuality is plainly condemned (Lev. 18:22; 
20:13;  I  Cor.  6:9;  I  Tim.  1:9-10).  However,  in  contemporary 
Christendom  attempts  have  been  made  to  avoid  the  obvious  here, 
especially  with  the  claim  that  idolatrous  cult  prostitution  is  described 
rather than a “loving” relationship.
29
 
 
(c)  Note that such a relationship involves “burning desire” (cf. Gen. 19:5) 
which  Paul  does  not  describe  as  natural  or  inherited,  as  if  the 
homosexual  was  not  responsible  for  his  depraved  cravings,  but 
unnatural.  On  the  contrary,  such  lusting  remains  unnatural,  as  is  the 
case  with  pedophilia  and  bestiality.  However,  it  must  be  born  in  mind 
that  this  present  sensual  age  is  more  affected  by  the  rationale  of 
indulgent feelings rather than truth and righteousness.  
 
(d)  Such perversion reaps a designer reward, a recompense tailored to justly 
frustrate  the  sinner  by  turning  his  “delightful”  sin  into  vexing 
punishment.  This  was  the  case  with  Haman’s  commensurate 
punishment  when  hung  on  the  gallows  he  had  fiendishly  prepared  for 
Mordecai  (Esther  5:14;  7:10).  So  homosexuals  “receive  in  their  own 
persons the due penalty of their error,” that is a variety of consequences 
including  a  violent  and  perverse  lifestyle,  reduced  
longevity,  fearful  diseases  including  Aids  that  offer  the  prospect  of  an 
agonizing death.  
 
(e)  Again, as with the lesbian, we do not declare God’s abandonment to be 
absolute  because  homosexuals  are  converted  and  their  desires  can  be 
reversed as specialist Christian ministries prove.   
 
c.  God abandons the ungodly to depraved minds, vs. 28-32. 
 
Man’s  fundamental  problem  is  his  mind;  above  all  else  he  has  a  mental  disease 
that  is  the  controlling  influence  in  his  existence.  Everything  else,  his  actions, 
motives, pursuits all flow from this root cause, so that he is mentally futile in his 
                                            
29
  In this regard a most blatant and biased article titled “homosexuality” is published by Inter-Varsity Press in 
The  Illustrated  Bible  Dictionary.  Especially  note  the  concluding  comment  regarding  the  Apostle  Paul’s 
teaching: “His three scattered references [to homosexuality] fit together in an impressive way as an expression 
of God’s will as he saw it,” II, p. 657.   
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  47
pursuits  (Eph.  4:17),  mentally  hostile  toward  righteousness  (Col.  1:21),  and 
mentally  defiled  (Tit.  1:15).  His  only  hope  is  a  renewed  mind  (Rom.  12:2),  the 
mind  of  Christ  (I  Cor.  2:16).  However,  man’s  predicament  escalates,  like  a 
growing  tumor  that  spreads  corruption,  while  at  the  same  time  he  claims  to  be 
perfectly  healthy  in  his  mind,  never  better.  To  such  willful  and  increasingly 
entrenched blindness, such intense depravity in the mind that reaches its climax in 
v.  32,  God  eventually  responds  with  His  abandonment  of  man  to  his  flaunted 
lifestyle. Such an overall way of mentally perverted living is now described. 
 
(1)  Abandonment to immoral behavior, v. 28. 
 
(a)  The  assumption  here  is  that  man,  though  fallen,  yet  had  a  basically 
orthodox  understanding  of  God  in  his  mind  (cf.  2:15).  However,  the 
mental sin tumor enlarged causing mankind “not to think it worthwhile 
to  focus  on  the  true  knowledge  [™p…gnwsij,  epigno¯ sis,]  of  God  any 
more,” but rather false images, mental delusions. 
 
(b)  Consequently God responds by abandoning such men to this ingrained 
madness,  that  is  those  who  are  so  advanced  in  their  disease  and 
thoroughly  enamored  with  it.  Such  reprobates  are  punished  by  being 
left  to  their  folly,  namely  consignment  to  innumerable  wares  and 
enticements  at  Vanity  Fair  where,  claiming  to  see,  they  are  left  to  the 
imprisonment of their darkness (John 9:40-41).   
 
(2)  Abandonment to a variety of sin, vs. 29-31.  
 
Here  is  a  symphony  of  sin  comprised  of  various  sinful  symptoms  or 
instrumentalities  that  are  all  used  to  play  the  Satan’s  music.  They  are 
indications  of  man’s  mental  disease.  Every  sinner  has  his  skilled  speciality 
just  as  there  are  skilled  specialists  in  an  orchestra.  That  these  are  especially 
artful  sinners  is  indicated  by  their  description  as  being  “filled”  or  highly 
proficient.  The  following  three-fold  division  is  based  upon  grammatical 
considerations.
30
 
 
(a)  Four sins commencing with “unrighteousness,” v. 29a.  
 
“Unrighteousness”  focuses  on  unholiness,  ungodliness,  essential  sin, 
with the following three being resultant. 
 
(b)  Five sins commencing with “envy,” v. 29b. 
 
The “fullness” of their corruption is manifest in the way their energy is 
so devoted toward these particular sins. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
30
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 95, n. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  48 
(c)  Twelve sins commencing with “gossip,” v. 29c. 
 
The focus here is upon vocal, high-handed opposition that rages against 
civil standards and God Himself. 
 
(3)  Abandonment to the promotion of sin, v. 32. 
 
(a)  As  pagan  men  indulge  themselves  in  the  aforementioned  catalog  of  21 
representative sins, what is their moral state of mind? Certainly there is 
no  ground  for  exoneration,  as  if  they  were  ignorant,  since  they  are 
“knowing  well  [™pignÒntej,  epignontes]  the  righteous  decree  of  God.” 
The  emphasis  here  is  upon  present  awareness,  thus  Murray  observes: 
“The most degraded of men, degraded because judicially abandoned by 
God,  are  not  destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  righteous 
judgments  [soul-hardening  efforts  notwithstanding].  In  terms  of  2:14-
15, conscience asserts itself.”
31
 
 
(b)  However this knowledge is inclusive not only of the fact of sin, but also 
guilt  before  God  and  its  consequences,  namely  death,  akin  to  the  civil 
death penalty that also has spiritual ramifications (cf. 6:23). This penal 
judgment is readily acknowledged by man to be his due; further, he us 
unashamedly  culpable,  and  at  the  same  time  a  braggart  about  his 
exploits.    
 
(c)  Yet  the  bottom  of  the  barrel  has  still  not  been  reached,  for  it  is  one 
thing to be personally intoxicated with sin and quite another to boldly, 
arrogantly,  and  enthusiastically  promote  such  a  cause  amongst  others. 
This is most offensive of all to Paul for the reason that it reflects man’s 
unholy  attempt  to  storm  the  holy  ramparts  of  heaven,  to  instigate  a 
rebellion  of  the  most  insolent  proportions.  Certain  deep-dyed  sinners 
are  content  to  debase  themselves  in  relative  isolation,  but  not  here. 
Rather, the energetic advancement of human depravity is applauded. It 
is  like  the  contemporary  “gay  pride”  promotion  of  the  homosexual 
community.   
 
(d)  Illustration. Dr. James Montgomery Boice relates:  
 
Dr.  John  Gerstner,  Professor  Emeritus  of  Pittsburgh  Theological 
Seminary,  was  teaching  about  the  depravity  of  man,  and  to  make  his 
point  he  compared  men  and  women  to  rats.  After  he  had  finished  his 
address  there  was  a  question-and-answer  period,  and  someone  who  had 
been  offended  by  the  comparison  asked  Gerstner  to  apologize.  Gerstner 
did. “I do apologize,” he said. I apologize profusely. The comparison was 
terribly unfair . . . to the rats.” He then went on to show that what a rat 
does, it does by the gifts of God that make it ratlike. It does not sin. But 
we,  when  we  behave  like  rats,  behave  worse  than  we  should  and  even 
worse than rats. We are worse that “beasts” in our behavior.
32
 
                                            
31
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 52. 
32
  James Montgomery Boice, Romans 1-4, p. 198. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  49
B.  THE JEWS ARE THOROUGH SINNERS, 2:1-3:8 
 
The  identification  of  the  addressees  of  the  section  that  follows,  especially  in  vs.  1-16,  is  of 
vital  importance.  Clearly  Paul  anticipates  that  many  who  have  read  thus  far  would  have 
been disturbed at such an ugly revelation of the pagan world. They would have been eager 
to  distance  themselves  from  such  revolting  barbarism,  as  well  as  Greek  and  Roman 
debauchery.  Who  then  might  react  this  way?  Obviously  the  religious  who  are  moralistic 
would  likely  object.  And  it  is  for  this  reason,  along  with  other  more  specific  matters,  that 
most commentators believe that in general, Paul primarily has the Jews in mind. This is not 
to  deny  that  Paul  has  Gentiles  in  mind  who  are  attending  the  church  at  Rome  (cf.  2:9-10; 
3:9; 7:1; 11:13). Yet the argument at this point strongly focuses on the self-righteous Jew for 
the  following  major  reasons.  First,  according  to  Murray,  “the  propensity  to  judge  the 
Gentiles for their religious and moral perversity was peculiarly characteristic of the Jew.”
33
  
Second, v. 4 suggests by implication the Jews as being the objects of God’s kindness, while 
vs. 9-10 lead up to the explicit statement of v. 17. Third, as Moo points out, “In 1:18-32, 
Paul  describes  those  people  whom  he  accuses  of  perverting  their  knowledge  of  God 
(Gentiles,  primarily)  in  the  third  person:  “they”  turned  away  from  God;  God  handed 
“them” over. In chap. 2, however, it is the second person singular, “you,” that Paul uses in 
making his accusation (2:1-5, 17-29).”
34
 
 
1.  The Jews’ accountability before God, vs. 1-16. 
 
It is common for man to judge categories of sin according to certain outward features 
and  physical  manifestations,  and  describe  them  as  perverted,  savage,  disgusting,  and 
uncivilized.  Whereas  other  crimes  that  are  void  of violence  and brutality  are  regarded 
to  be  less  serious.  So  Paul  now  addresses  this  problem  in  the  light  of  the  preceding 
catalog  of  such  repulsive  wickedness.  The  moralistic  Jew  would  readily  express  self-
righteous outrage at such a loathsome scene. However, God looks on the condition of 
the heart and judges intent, not mere symptoms (I Sam. 16:7). Thus it would be true to 
suggest that Christ’s greatest condemnation fell of the Scribes, Sadducees, and Pharisees 
rather than the criminal element of Jerusalem (Matt. 23:1-39).  
 
a.  The impartial judgment of the Jew, vs. 1-4. 
 
Like Nathan the prophet who jolted King David with his accusatory declaration, 
“You  are  the  man!”  (II  Sam.  12:7),  so  Paul  now  startles  the  Jew  with  a  similar 
charge  of serious  guilt,  notwithstanding  his  smug  claim  to  relative  civility.  Dr.  J. 
Gresham Machen recounts a French novel titled The Disciple by Paul Bourget.  
It describes . . . the simple and austere life of a noted philosopher and psychologist. 
He  was  engrossed  altogether  in  the  things  of  the  mind.  His  lodging  was  up  four 
flights of stairs. His daily existence was an inevitable routine. Coffee at six o’clock, 
lunch  or  breakfast  at  ten,  walk  until  noon,  work  until  four,  visits  of  scholars  and 
students three times a week from four to six, dinner at six, short walk, bed promptly 
at ten. An inoffensive, scholarly man if there ever was one, a man who, in the words 
of  his  caretaker,  “wouldn’t  hurt  a  fly.”  But  one  day  this  peaceful  routine  was 
strangely  broken  into.  The  philosopher  was  summoned  to  a  criminal  inquest.  A 
                                            
33
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 55. 
34
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 125. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  50 
former pupil of his was accused of murder. He had been a brilliant young man, who 
had  climbed  those  four  flights  of  stairs  full  of  enthusiasm  for  what  he  regarded  as 
liberating  doctrines  only  too  well.  In  the  prison  he  wrote  an  account  of  his  life  for 
the eye of his revered master. In it the abstract becomes concrete. The terrible story 
is told of the way in which those supposedly liberating doctrines work out in actual 
practice.
35
 
Who was the greater sinner, the violent student of his philosopher master? 
 
(1)  For their practice, vs. 1-3. 
 
In  considering  the  declared  similarity  of  the  Jews’  sins  with  those  of  the 
Gentiles,  one  formal  difference  ought  to  be  noted  and  that  is  the  Jews’ 
penchant  for  cloaking  their  transgressions  in  contrast  with  the  more  open 
display  of  the  pagan  world.  This  point  is  especially  implicit  in  2:21-23,  28-
29, Matthew 23:25-28. 
 
(a)  Of Gentile sins, v. 1. 
 
1)  The  “therefore”  probably  connects  us  with  the  major  thought  of 
1:18-19,  that  is  that  the  Jews  qualify  for  judgment  since  they  are, 
with the Gentiles, involved in “all ungodliness and unrighteousness 
of men.” In judging they have a standard by which their own sin is 
judged. Thus they are sinners of the same kind, who sin just as the 
Gentiles  do,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  their  hypocritical  spirit  of 
judgment.
36
 
 
2)  The  Jew  is  “without  excuse,”  just  as  is  the  Gentile,  1:20,  though 
on the grounds of greater accountability, 2:4, 9, 24.  
 
3)  But how can it be said that the Jews “practice the same things” as 
the Gentiles? Most likely Paul is referring to the catalog of sins in 
1:29-31,  which  he  on  other  occasions  attributed  in  a  similar  way 
to society that included Judaism (Gal. 5:19-21; Col. 3:5, 8; I Tim. 
1:9-10; II Tim. 3:2-4). 
 
(b)  Of God-defined sins, v. 2. 
 
1)  A  more  literal  translation  here  reads,  “Now  we  know  that  the 
judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth  [the  real  facts],  on  those 
practicing such things.” The inference is that, in contrast with the 
partial  judgment  of  the  Jew  in  v.  1,  God  is  impartial  as  v.  11 
confirms.  Because  of  God’s  omniscience,  there  must  be  agreement 
on the part of the Jews that God has all of the facts at hand, and 
thus His verdict is more reliable, indeed unimpeachable. 
 
                                            
35
  J. Gresham Machen, The Christian Faith in the Modern World, pp. 95-96. 
36
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 129-130. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  51
2)  Illustration. Following John Bunyan’s imprisonment for preaching 
at an illegal conventicle (assembly) in 1660, his trials before several 
magistrates  proved  to  be  less  than  the  epitome  of  British  justice. 
Later  his  wife  made  an  impassioned  plea  before  several  judges  as 
follows:
37
 
Wom. He preacheth nothing but the Word of God, said she. 
Twis.  He  preach  the  Word  of  God!  said  Twisdon;  and  withal  she 
thought  he  would  have  struck  her;  he  runneth  up  and  down,  and 
doth harm. 
Wom.  No,  my  Lord,  said  she,  it’s  not  so;  God  hath  owned  him, 
and done much good by him.   
Twis. God! said he; his doctrine is the doctrine of the devil. 
Wom. My Lord, said she, when the righteous Judge shall appear, it 
will be known that his doctrine is not the doctrine of the devil. 
 
(c)  Of inescapable sins, v. 3. 
 
1)  “Hear me again, oh religious man! Follow my reasoning, consider 
the  consequences  of  what  I  just  proposed,  v.  2,  which  you 
undoubtedly  agree  with.  If  you  sin  as  the  pagan  does,  and  you 
certainly do, then how can you possibly escape from the universal, 
impartial Judge?”  
 
2)  So  Paul  raises  the  question  of  the  natural  man’s  inclination  to 
hypocrisy, to regard himself as a modest sinner in the light of all of 
the  big  sinners  out  there!  Why  does  a  man  regard  himself  as  a 
modest sinner? Because he considers himself to be religious, pious, 
righteous,  spiritually  advanced,  knowledgeable,  moral,  according 
to his own estimate.  
 
3)  But  Paul pricks  this  empty bubble with  the  substance  of his  logic. 
If the pagans won’t escape according to their actions, then neither 
will the Jew. The true judgment of God, v. 2, will find the religious 
man wanting; his boasted flimsy covering will be stripped away so 
as to leave him naked, exposed, cringing in guilt before God. 
 
(2)  For their presumption, vs. 4. 
 
Paul now asks another rhetorical question which addresses the matter of the 
history  of  Israel  and  its  rebellious  attitude  toward  God,  particularly  its 
shameful  presumption  toward  God’s  covenant  faithfulness  and  forbearance, 
as reflected in Nehemiah 9:5-31.  
 
(a)  The Jew took God’s “kindness” and “forbearance” and “patience” for 
granted  and  confused  it  with  “just  acceptance.”  His  “temporary 
                                            
37
  John Bunyan, Works, I, p. 61. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  52 
tolerance”  or  “truce”  was  mistakenly  understood  as  “reconciliation” 
and “peace.”
38
  
 
(b)  Why did God patiently wait upon Israel while it arrogantly persisted in 
sin?  It  was  His  desire  that  such  an  extended  opportunity  would  be  an 
encouragement  to  repentance.  So  Peter  alludes  to  this  teaching  of  Paul 
in  II  Peter  3:15,  “and  regard  the  patience  of  our  Lord  to  be  salvation; 
just  as  also  our  beloved  brother  Paul,  according  to  the  wisdom  given 
him,  wrote  to  you.”  But  God’s  people  wilfully  ignored  this  hiatus  of 
grace,  this  long  pause  of  mercy,  being  contemptuously  persuaded  that 
repentance was not necessary  
 
(c)  What  is  the  repentance  that  is  sought?  It  is  a  “change  of  thinking” 
regarding  personal  sin  in  particular,  man,  God,  Christ,  the  Bible,  etc. 
that  issues  forth  in  saving  faith  and  resultant  godliness.  Does  God  call 
all  men  to  repent?  Yes  (Acts  17:30).  Can  man  naturally  repent?  No 
(Heb. 12:16-17). Is true repentance a gift of God? Yes, even as is faith 
(II Tim. 2:24-25). Is it man’s responsibility to repent? Yes (Acts 26:20). 
If a man will not repent, then what? Judgment (Matt. 11:20-22). 
 
(d)  Illustration. Stephen Charnock comments:  
All  the  notices  and  warnings  that  God  gives  men,  of  either  public  or 
personal  calamities,  is  a  continual  invitation  to  repentance.  .  .  .  [God’s 
longsuffering] doth, as it  were, take us by the hand, and point us to the 
way  wherein  we  should  go.  .  .  .  His  patience  stands  between  the 
offending  creature  and  eternal  misery  a  long  time,  that  men  might  not 
foolishly throw away their souls, and be damned for their impenitency.
39
 
 
b.  The impartial judgment of Jew and Gentile, v. 5-16. 
 
The warning of certain judgment for all men, introduced in v. 3, now dominates 
Paul’s exhortation in vs. 5-16. The anomaly here is that whereas the pagan, with a 
less definitive revelation of God’s righteous demands, needs no such warning, yet 
the Jew, “to whom belongs the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants 
and the giving of the Law and the temple service and the promises,” 9:4, needs a 
severe wake-up call, akin to being severely hit over the head with a piece of two 
by four. 
 
(1)  God’s universal justice, vs. 5-10. 
 
Whereas  the  Jew  was  forever  making  distinctions  between  himself  and  the 
Gentile, that is with regard to his racial superiority according to divine right, 
Paul is at pains to point out that in terms of His righteous demands, God is 
not so discriminatory. His election of Israel was unto holiness (Deut. 7:6-8; 
14:2). 
 
                                            
38
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 112-113. 
39
  Stephen Charnock, Works, II, pp. 526, 527. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  53
(a)  This justice accumulates to the Jew first, v. 5. 
 
1)  God’s  patience  presents  a  storehouse  of  gracious  opportunity  to 
the  heart  that  is  penitent.  However,  at  the  same  time,  the 
impenitent  accumulate  a  storehouse  of  indignation  that  shall  be 
inherited at the final day of judgment. For the impenitent, that day 
will be “the day of wrath;” for the penitent, that day will usher in 
“glory and honor and immortality, eternal life,” v. 7, cf. v. 10. 
 
2)  Paul seems to recall the proverbial obstinacy and hard-heartedness 
of Israel which Stephen condemned in Acts 7:51, 53. But a day is 
coming  of  final  settlement,  and  no  one  will  be  excluded  from 
divine  scrutiny  (Rev.  20:11-15).  Then  will  come  that  “revelation” 
and  “righteous  judgment”which  is  according  to  truth,  that  lifting 
of the lid whereby the “secrets of men” will be exposed, v. 16.  
 
3)  Illustration. Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments:  
 
That  is  the  day.  The  day  the  books  will  be  opened  and  all  this 
wrath  that  men  have  been  treasuring  up  for  themselves  will  be 
produced  in  evidence  against  them.  They  will  be  punished.  And 
what  will  be  revealed  .  .  .  is  the  righteous  judgment  of  God. 
Nobody  will  have  any  complaint;  everybody  will  see  God’s 
righteous judgment. And that is why the Book of Revelation tells us 
earlier that some people, when they see it, will say to the mountains 
and the rocks, ‘Fall on us and hide us’ [Rev. 6:16]. There will be no 
excuse;  there  will  be  no  plea.  God’s  judgment  is  always  according 
to  truth,  and  on  that  great  day  the  truth,  the  righteousness,  the 
justice will be finally revealed.
40
 
 
(b)  This justice accumulates to the Jew first and the Gentile, vs. 6-10. 
 
For  the  authentic  Christian,  these  five  verses  have  presented  a  seeming 
serious  problem  since,  on  the  surface  they  seem  to  conflict  with  the 
essence of the Gospel, namely that the repentant and believing sinner is 
saved through faith alone in Jesus Christ’s merits to the total exclusion 
of  human  deeds,  (3:21,  24;  4:1-25;  Gal.  2:15-16;  3:11;  Eph.  2:8-9). 
Now  undoubtedly  this  is  the  true  gospel,  so  what  in  reality  does  Paul 
mean here? Recall that, as we have already seen, Paul is addressing the 
presumptuous Jew, especially as indicated in vs. 4-5. So at this point it 
is no use describing judgment in gospel and grace terms to this religious 
person  who  does  not  understand  the  gospel  or  grace.  So  leaving  the 
gospel aside, Paul describes the outward justification of man as the self-
righteous  Jew  will  understand,  namely  the  judgment  of  his  works, 
whether good or bad. The good deeds here are in fact authenticating or 
external  justification  based  on  free  justification  (Eph.  2:8-10);  the  bad 
                                            
40
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 2:1-3:20, p. 73. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  54 
deeds  are  also  authenticating  of  judgment  without  grace  (Rev.  20:11-
15).
41
  
 
1)  It is established in the Old Testament, v. 6. 
 
a)  In  quoting  Psalm  62:12  and  Proverbs  24:12,  Paul  addresses 
the  Jew  on  his  own  ground,  that  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures. 
However  the  declaration  concerning  “every  man”  is 
universally encompassing, and infers that the God of Israel is 
the  moral  Sovereign  of  the  universe;  in  view  of  vs.  9-10, 
clearly  Paul  has  this  wider  perspective.  Yet  for  the  Jew  who 
hears  Paul’s  exhortation,  the  issue  is  not  covenantal  security 
via circumcision, but “deeds” that are pleasing to God.  
 
b)  The New Testament makes several references to the fact that 
God’s  judgment  will  be  according  to  human  works  (Matt. 
7:21;  16:27;  25:31-46;  John  5:28-29;  II  Cor.  5:10;  11:15; 
Gal.  6:7-9;  II  Tim.  4:14;  I  Pet.  1:17;  Rev.  2:23;  22:12). 
Certainly the unbeliever will be judged by his faithless deeds, 
his  ungodly  deeds,  his unholy  deeds.  But  so will  the  nominal 
child of God, and even the genuine child of God. In the latter 
instance,  this  fruit  will  be  judged  as  validation,  such  as  in 
Matthew 7:15-20, where the expectation of a good fruit tree 
is that it produce good fruit. 
 
2)  It recognizes heart righteousness, v. 7. 
 
a)  God’s  righteous  judgment  delights  in  and  approves  of  those 
who  “obey  the  truth,”  in  contrast  with  those  who  “disobey 
the  truth,”  v.  8.  To  “obey  the  truth”  is  to  respond  to  the 
gospel (Gal. 5:7) with a life of virtue and holy affections, akin 
to “the obedience of faith,” 1:5; 16:26. 
 
b)  This is a grace response, not a legal performance, even though 
the gospel is not made prominent. Here are the distinguishing 
responses  of  a  true  child  of  God  that  are  reflective  of  the 
Beatitudes (Matt. 5:3-13). There is perseverance (Matt. 24:13; 
Heb. 3:14), unlike the seed that falls on rocky ground (Matt. 
13:20-21); there is desire for the glory to come (5:2; 8:18-23), 
honor  or  recognition  (II  Tim.  2:19-21),  immortality  or 
incorruption  (I  Cor.  15:50-53  ),  and  eternal  life  in  its 
consummate sense as intimate union with God (I John 5:20). 
God’s  judgment  will  be,  “Well  done,  ood  and  faithful 
servant” (Matt. 5:14-30). 
 
 
                                            
41
  For  helpful  comment  on  this  whole  problem  refer  to  MacArthur,  pp.  125-130;  Moo,  pp.  139-144;  Morris, 
pp. 147-149; Shedd, pp. 38-39. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  55
c)  Leon Morris describes those approved of God as follows:  
Their trust is in God, not in their own achievement. He [Paul] 
refers to those whose lives are oriented in a certain way. Their 
minds  are  not  set  on  material  prosperity  or  the  like,  nor  on 
happiness,  nor  even  on  being  religious.  They  are  set  on  glory 
and honor and immortality, qualities which come from a close 
walk with God. The bent of their lives is on heavenly things.
42
 
 
3)  It recognizes heart unrighteousness, v. 8. 
 
a)  God’s righteous judgment is displeased with and disapproves 
of  those  who  “disobey  the  truth,”  whether  for  the  Jew  it  be 
the Law written on tables of stone, or for the Gentile it be the 
Law  written  on  the  conscience  (2:12,  14-15).  After  the 
manner  of  1:25,  truth  is  wilfully  jettisoned  while 
unrighteousness  is  embraced,  the  inevitable  result  being  the 
outpouring of God’s “wrath and indignation.” 
 
b)  Here God is offended, even intensely angry with bold sinners, 
not  merely  irritated.  The  focus  here  is  upon  God’s  “wrath,” 
Ñrg», orge¯, reflected in active judgment (v. 5; Col. 3:5-6), His 
outward  emotion,  and  “indignation,”  qumÒj  thumos, 
illustrated by the Jew’s rage against Christ at Nazareth (Luke 
4:28-29), His inner revulsion. John Gill comments: The wrath 
of  God  is  the  heat  of  his  great  anger  (Deut.  29:24);  it  is  his 
anger  not  only  kindled  and  incensed,  but  blown  up  into  a 
flame;  it  is  the  indignation  of  his  anger,  the  fury  and 
fierceness  of  it  (Isa.  30:30;  42:25;  Hos.  11:9).”
43
  This  divine 
abhorrence  to  sin  will  ultimately  confront  all  men  except  a 
just means of placation be provided for the repentant sinner.   
 
4)  It is rewarding to the unrighteous, v. 9. 
 
a)  There is repetition here concerning God’s nondiscrim-inatory 
justice,  yet  emphasis  is  placed  upon  the  experience  of  His 
wrath  and  resultant  feelings.  Hence  the  souls  of  the  wicked 
will  undergo  “tribulation,”  ql‹yij,  thlipsis,  anguish  and 
affliction,  as  well  as  “distress,”  stenocwr…a,  stenocho¯ ria, 
stressful  confinement  (cf.  Rom.  8:35;  II  Cor.  6:4  where 
Christians have similar feelings). The fact that they will have 
like  company  will  offer  no  consolation,  as  the  ungodly  often 
glibly claim. 
 
b)  First  the  Jew,  on  account  of  his  high  accountability  (Jer. 
25:29;  Amos  3:2),  and  then  the  Gentile,  representing  the 
                                            
42
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 116-117. 
43
  John Gill, A Body Of Doctrinal And Practical Divinity, p. 69. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  56 
whole  human  race,  will  have  their  sin  exposed  and 
condemned.  The  Jew  will  not  be  able  to  claim  exoneration 
through  Abraham;  the  Gentile  will  not  be  able  to  claim 
ignorance as a mitigating circumstance. 
 
5)  It is rewarding to the righteous, v. 10. 
 
a)  Again  there  is  repetition  here,  but  added  to  “glory  and 
honor”  is  “peace,”  holy  contentment,  the  experience  of  soul 
bliss  at  being  the  object  of  God’s  approval.  But  does  this 
whole  fulness  of  blessing  come  because  a  person  “does 
good”?  No,  in  terms  of  “doing  good”  being  a  justifying 
ground  of  obtaining  acceptance  with  God.  Yes,  but  only  in 
the  sense  that  a  father  is  pleased  because  his  son  does  good; 
however,  this  “doing  good”  in  no  way  obtains  sonship,  it 
merely reflects it. 
 
b)  Again,  in  blessing,  the  Jew  is  to  have  priority,  and  this  may 
well  have  prophetic  significance  for  Paul  (11:12). 
Commenting  on  Revelation  16,  Jonathan  Edwards  writes 
concerning the future of the nation of Israel: 
Without  doubt,  they  will  return  to  their  own  land;  because 
when  their  unbelief  ceases,  their  dispersion,  the  dreadful  and 
signal  punishment  of  their  unbelief,  will  cease  too.  As  they 
have continued hitherto, with one consent, to dishonor Christ 
by  rejecting  the  gospel,  so  shall  they  meet  together  to  honor 
him, by openly professing of it with one mouth, and practice 
it  with  one  heart  and  one  soul,  together  lamenting  their 
obstinacy,  as  it  is  said  they  shall  (Zech.  12:11-12),  and 
together praising God for his grace in enlightening them. And 
as  they  have  hitherto  continued  a  distinct  nation,  that  they 
might  continue  a  visible  monument  of  his  displeasure,  for 
their  rejecting  and  crucifying  their  Messiah,  so  after  their 
conversion will they still be a distinct nation, that they may be 
a  visible  monument  of  God’s  wonderful  grace  and  power  in 
their calling and conversion.
44
  
 
(2)  God’s nondiscriminatory justice, vs. 11-16.  
 
In  mentioning  God’s  certain  judgment  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile  in  vs.  8-9, 
Paul  has  raised  a  problem  that  continues  to  be  asserted  today  with  the  oft 
heard question, “What will happen to the heathen, those who have not heard 
the revelation of the gospel, or even Scripture?” The implication is often that 
God would not judge those with diminished responsibility. So Paul responds 
here  with  the  explanation  that  the  Gentiles  are  indeed  responsible  for  their 
sin. 
 
 
                                            
44
  Jonathan Edwards, Works, V, p. 135. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  57
(a)  It is intrinsic to His nature, v. 11. 
 
1)  Illustration. As John MacArthur comments, this impartiality is like 
“the popular  symbolic  statue of  justice  .  .  .  a  woman  blindfolded, 
signifying that she is unable to see who is before her to be judged 
and  therefore  is  not  tempted  to  be  partial  for  or  against  the 
accused.  Sometimes  she  is  also  pictured  with  her  hands  tied, 
suggesting  she  cannot  receive  a  bribe.”
45
  In  other  words,  as 
Abraham  well  understood  (Gen.  18:25),  God,  being  omniscient 
and holy, is fair with all of mankind. 
 
2)  God  will  judge  Israel  according  to  righteousness,  and  not  with 
deference  to  its  favored  elect  status  or  responsibility  in  being  the 
custodian  of  His  Law.  As  He  is  (Acts  10:34),  so  He  commands 
(Lev.  19:15;  Deut.  10:17).  Likewise  with  the  Gentile,  God’s 
righteousness  will  fall  on  him  with  the  same  impartiality. 
However,  note  that  God  is  partial  and  discriminatory  in  election, 
the  distinction  being  that  His  sovereign  choice  of  certain  sinners 
unto life is always just through holy, justifying grace.  
 
(b)  It is according to appropriate revelation, v. 12. 
 
1)  The  term  “Law”  here  refers  specifically  to  the  Jewish  Torah  or 
first  five  books  of  the  Old  Testament;  this  is  the  meaning  of  90 
percent of Paul’s use of this term.
46
 Therefore the first statement in 
this verse refers to all who are not under its dominion, specifically 
the  pagan  world.  Yet  in  not  having  Moses  to  guide  them,  the 
Gentiles  still  suffer  the  wages  of  sin,  just  as  the  Jew  does.  Paul  is 
making  a  categorical  statement  that  though  the  Gentiles  do  not 
have  the  Torah,  yet  they  are  accountable  in  terms  of  having 
offended  God’s  righteousness.  But  how  can  this  be?  Clearly  from 
v.  11  we  conclude  that  this  judgment  of  “perishing”  must  be 
equitable.  But  by  what  means  then  does  the  Gentile  have  any 
knowledge of God’s righteous demands while being ignorant of the 
Law?  
 
2)  On  the  other  hand,  “all  who  have  sinned  under  [with]  the  Law” 
obviously  refers  to  Israel  being  especially  accountable  as  a 
transgressing  nation.  In  Luke12:41-48  the  Lord  Jesus  particularly 
addresses this point of greater responsibility. But why is the Jew to 
be  judged while  the  Gentile  perishes?  What  meaning  distinguishes 
these words? Lloyd-Jones answers:  
It is that the standard which God applies to the Jew is a higher and 
a severer standard than that which He applies to the Gentile. Now 
that  does  not  make  any  difference  to  their  ultimate  destiny,  but  it 
                                            
45
  John MacArthur, Romans 1-8, pp. 135-136. 
46
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 145 n. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  58 
does  seem  to  indicate  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the  punishment. 
God  demands  more  of  the  Jew  than  the  Gentile  because  He  has 
given him the law.
47
 
 
3)  The  overall  point  here  is  the  reiteration  of  that  already  pressed 
home  in  1:18;  2:6-10,  namely  the  inevitable  judgment  by  God  of 
the whole human race. But further, as Moo concludes, “It is clear 
from these verses [vs. 11-12] that Paul argues for universal human 
sinfulness,  and  a  sinfulness  of  such  a  nature  that  condemnation 
must be the outcome.”
48
 
 
(c)  It is based on doing rather than hearing, v. 13. 
 
1)  In  simple  terms,  what  counts  is  not  so  much  having  the  Law  as 
was Israel’s privilege, or the reading of the Law as was the custom 
in  Synagogues,  or  even  the  hearing  of  the  Law  every  Sabbath  by 
the  Jewish  populace,  but  the  doing  of  the  Law.  Obviously  Paul 
believes  that  this  priority  has  been  inverted.  While  repeating  the 
essential  thrust  of  vs.  6-10,  his  focus  is  upon  the  disobedient  and 
hypocritical Jew (Matt. 7:24-27; 12:50; 23:1-3).  
 
2)  The  “justification”  that  Paul  describes  must  be  of  the  same  sort 
that  is  implied  in  vs.  6-10,  though  it  also  incorporates  the 
“justification”  that  James  1:22;  2:21-26  describes,  that  is  the 
outward  evidence  that  vindicates  the  profession  of  inward  saving 
grace.  
 
3)  Application. Thus we might paraphrase here, “It is not the hearers 
of the gospel and doctrine and music and good Christian literature 
and  Christian  radio  and  preaching  and  tape  cassettes  who  are 
acceptable before God, but those who evidence godliness resulting 
from this ministry.” True heart religion is consistently effecting.  
 
(d)  It regards Gentile law-keeping, v. 14-15. 
 
These  verses  form  a  significant  parenthesis  that  answers  the  question 
raised, but not answered, in v. 12 concerning the Gentile’s source of his 
knowledge  of  the  righteous  demands  of  God  apart  from  the  Jewish 
Torah. 
 
1)  Their law is not Mosaic, v. 14. 
 
a)  Paul  posits  the  case  of  a  Gentile  who  lives  righteously  as  a 
God-fearer such as Cornelius (Acts 10:1-2). He lives a moral 
life that parallels the ethics of the Jew derived from the Law, 
yet  he  is  ignorant  of  the  Law.  The  answer  is  that  he  acts  by 
                                            
47
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 2:1-3:20, p. 107. 
48
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 147. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  59
“nature”  or  fÚsij,  phusis,  which  word  was  used  in  1:26-27 
to  describe  natural  sexual  functions.  Murray  describes  this 
capacity  as  “done  by  native  instinct  or  propension,  by 
spontaneous  impulse  as  distinguished  from  what  is  induced 
by  forces  extraneous  to  ourselves.”
49
  This  is  a  universal 
capacity,  and  it  concerns  a  fixed  rather  than  a  relative  code. 
Hence,  the  heathen  are  not  ignorant  of  right  and  wrong  as 
some would suggest.  
 
b)  This  innate  moral  sensitivity  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the 
witness  of  nature  in  1:20.  Boice  quotes  C.  S.  Lewis  who 
perceptively recognizes this basic standard in man’s everyday 
manner  of  living.  In  “the  initial  argument  in  his  classic 
defense of the faith, Mere Christianity, Lewis begins with the 
observation  that  when  people  argue  with  one  another,  an 
angry person almost always appeals to some basic standard of 
behavior that the other person is assumed to recognize.  
They say things like this: ‘How’d you like it if anyone did the 
same to you?’ - ‘That’s my seat, I was there first’ - ‘Leave him 
alone, he isn’t doing you any harm’ - ‘Why should you shove 
in  first?’  -  ‘Give  me  a  bit  of  your  orange,  I  gave  you  a  bit  of 
mine’  -  ‘Come  on,  you  promised.’  People  say  things  like  that 
every  day,  educated  people  as  well  as  uneducated,  and 
children  as  well  as  grown-ups.”  What  interested  Lewis  about 
these  remarks  is  that  the  people  making  them  are  not  merely 
saying  that  the  other  person’s  behavior  just  does  not  happen 
to suit them, but rather that the behavior of the other person 
is wrong.
50
 
 
c)  Thus  the  Gentiles  are  “a  law  to  themselves,”  or  literally, 
“they  themselves  are  [a]  law,”  that  is,  as  distinct  from  the 
Jews they have their own law which is still a revelation from 
the  same  God.  For  this  reason  the  Gentile  is  morally 
accountable, not innocent.  
 
2)  Their law is internal, v. 15. 
 
The connection here is that the moral doing of the Gentiles, v. 14, 
indicates  a  state  of  moral  being,  v.  15.  However,  from  whence 
comes  this  moral  being,  what  exactly  is  it,  and  how  does  it  effect 
the Gentile?  
 
a)  Clearly  it  is  God  who  “writes”  a  moral  transcript  or  “the 
work  [singular,  cf.  plural  in  v.  14]”  of  the  law”  on  “their 
hearts.”  Indeed  it  is  God’s  inscription  on  “all  hearts,”  even 
                                            
49
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 73. 
50
  Boice, Romans, I, p. 237. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  60 
the  Jew.  But  what  the  Gentile  has  is  sufficient  to  make  him 
accountable even if it is not as definitive as the Torah.  
 
b)  Note that it is “the work [emphasis added] of the Law” that 
is  inscribed  on  the  heart  and  not  the  Law  itself.  This  fine 
distinction, if valid, simply avoids, as Murray states, “a state 
of  heart  and  mind  and  will  far  beyond  that  predicated  of 
unbelieving  Gentiles  [cf.  Jer.  31:33;  II  Cor.  3:3].”
51
  On  the 
other  hand,  could  they  “do  instinctively  the  things  of  the 
Law,” v. 14, without having the Law, at least a form of it, on 
their hearts?  
 
c)  What then has God inscribed on Gentile hearts? They seem to 
have  no  inclination  to  keep  the  Sabbath  according  to  the 
Torah,  yet  there  is  an  understanding  of  basic  righteousness 
and  accountability  that  results  in  a  sense  of  guilt  and  a 
propensity  to  worship.  Morris  adds,  “Theodoret  pointed  to 
Joseph’s  brothers  and  to  Abimelech  (Gen.  20:4-5)  as  people 
who  gave  evidence  of  knowing  right  and  wrong  and  who 
lived  before  the  giving  of  the  law  by  Moses.”
52
  A  significant 
passage  that  may  address  this  issue  is  Ecclesiastes  3:9  where 
God  is  described  as  having  “set  eternity  in  their  [the  sons  of 
men] heart.” Concerning this Delitzsch comments that God, 
has  also  established  in  man  an  impulse  leading  him  beyond 
that which is temporal toward the eternal: it lies in his nature 
not  to  be  contented  with  the  temporal,  but  to  break  through 
the  limits  which  it  draws  around  him,  to  escape  from  the 
bondage  and  disquietude  within  which  he  is  held,  and  amid 
the  ceaseless  changes  of  time  to  console  himself  by  directing 
his thoughts to eternity.
53
  
This  consideration  probably  incorporates  not  only  the 
internal  stamp  of  morality  in  2:15,  but  also  the 
comprehension  of  external  omnipotence  and  design  in  1:18. 
Thus  God’s  revelation  in  these  two  passages  is  to  be 
distinguished as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d)  How  then  does  this  revelation  of  “the  work  of  the  Law 
written in their hearts” effect the Gentiles? Paul attributes to 
                                            
51
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 74. 
52
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 126. 
53
  Franz Delitzsch, Commentary on Ecclesiastes, p. 261. 
Romans 1:20 
external revelation 
evidence of power/design 
addresses mind 
knowledge of God’s being 
Romans 2:15 
internal revelation 
evidence of law 
addresses heart/conscience 
knowledge of God’s law 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  61
them a “conscience,” sune…dhsij, suneide¯sis, literally meaning 
“knowledge with,” which responds to moral engraving on the 
heart.  This  response  is  sometimes  accusatory  and  sometimes 
gives approval. However, the moral engraving is the standard 
and not that of the conscience. Conscience is more human in 
its assessment as contrasted with God described in v. 16. We 
must beware of “Jiminny Cricket morality,” derived from the 
fairy  tale  Pinochio,  that  glibly  sings,  “And  always  let  your 
conscience be your guide.” Morris warns, “If we are looking 
for  the  proper  line  of  conduct,  we  should  notice  that  in  the 
Bible it is the revelation God has made that is to be our guide, 
not any subjective process. A conscience may be oversensitive 
(I Cor. 10:25) or not sensitive enough (I Tim. 4:2).
54
  
 
e)  To  sum  up,  the  Gentiles  or  heathen  are  sufficiently  aware  of 
God’s being and His morality; therefore they are accountable, 
and  thus  qualify  to  be  judged.  Concerning  this  truth  being 
evidenced  in  a  wide  variety  of  unevangelized  pagan  cultures, 
refer to Don Richardson’s Eternity In Their Hearts. 
 
(e)  It regards the secrets of men’s hearts, v. 16. 
 
The  theme  of  judgment  introduced  in  2:5,  and  especially  directed 
toward  the  religious  Jew,  has  veered  once  again  toward  the  pagan  in 
2:11-15  so  that  Paul  concludes  his  necessary  detour  with  v.  16.  The 
connection  with  the  preceding  vs.  14-15  is  one  of  contrast.  Whereas 
man is constantly judging himself via his conscience, either accusing or 
approving  his  response  to  “the  work  of  the  Law  written  on  their 
hearts,”  and  such  personal  estimation  is  flawed  through  human 
weakness and limited knowledge, God on the other hand, knowing “the 
secrets of men” will judge impeccably according to the gospel of Christ 
Jesus.  
 
1)  This  “day”  is  the  same  as  that  in  v.  5,  “the  day  of  wrath  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.”  The  judgment  of 
man  will  be  of  no  account,  and  especially  his  own  religious  self-
judgment.  Why  is  this  so?  Because  God  alone  truly  knows  the 
crevices  of  our  heart,  even  every  hidden  nook  or  high  shelf,  and 
better than ourselves (Ps. 139:1-4; Heb. 4:13).  
 
2)  What  will  be  the  basis  of  God’s  judgment?  To  begin  with  Paul 
describes  it  as  “my  gospel,”  as  in  16:15.  This  is  not  a  “Pauline 
gospel,”  a  gospel  of  his  own  conceiving  or  modification,  but  the 
one  and  exclusive  gospel  which  came  to  him  by  revelation  (Gal. 
                                            
54
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 127. Refer also to Franz Delitzsch who writes, “Nothing is more commonly 
read, than that conscience is a voice of God within us. Surely, literally and logically regarded, this is wrong.” 
A System of Biblical Psychology, p. 159. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  62 
1:6-9,  11-12)  and  was  recognized  by  James,  Peter  and  John  to  be 
identical with the gospel they proclaimed (Gal. 2:7-9).  
 
3)  More  specifically,  the  basis  of  God’s  judgment  will  be  “through 
Jesus  Christ.”  The  Son  of  God  will  be  the  appointed  judge  (John 
5:22,  27;  Acts  17:31),  and  his  Messiahship  the  primary  issue  of 
judgment  (John  3:18;  5:24).  However,  it  is  erroneous  to  suggest 
that men will be judged solely on the basis of their regard for Jesus 
Christ. Such unbelief may be the supreme sin, but it is not the only 
sin,  otherwise  the  judgment  of  2:3,  cf.  1:28-32,  would  not  be 
valid.
55
 
 
2.  The Jew’s hypocrisy before God, vs. 17-29. 
 
The  thrust  now  toward  the  self-righteous,  hypocritical  Jew  is  more  specific  than  ever. 
However  it  is  one  thing  to  observe  hypocrisy  and  quite  another  to  have  it  exposed  in 
such  a  way  that  the  hypocrite  is  convicted.  A  classic  illustration  of  this  problem  is 
provided  in  John  Bunyan’s  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress  where  Christian  and  Faithful  are 
confronted  with  the  hypocrisy  of  Talkative.  This  child  of  Prating  Row  loves  to  talk 
about  Bible  doctrine  when  it  suits,  as  well  as  base  talk  at  the  ale-bench,  while  at  the 
same time his life at home and work “is as empty of religion, as the white of an egg is 
of  savor.”  So  the  problem  for  Faithful  is  how  this  religious  masquerade  might  be 
exposed. Christian’s suggestion is that Talkative be challenged concerning personal sin 
and his own state of heart rather than that of others. This subject Talkative baulks at 
and  in  fact  withdraws  from  the  pilgrims’  company  claiming  to  be  peeved  at  such 
judgmental enquiry.
56
 But a further problem arises. Suppose the Jew were to confess his 
hypocrisy,  at  least  to  himself,  and  yet  claim  covenant  security,  especially  by  means  of 
circumcision.  How  then  is  he  to  be  confronted  as  still  being  in  jeopardy  under  God’s 
judgment? How  is  a  hypocritical Christian  to  be  dealt  with  who yet clings  to  hope  in 
baptism?  
 
a.  What do they say? vs. 17-20. 
 
Paul  returns  to  the  thought  of  v.  13,  namely  the  anomaly of  a Jew  being  a  mere 
“hearer of the Law.”  
 
(1)  They boast in Judaism, v. 17. 
 
The conditional “if” statement here refers to a situation that is assumed to be 
true. Thus Paul describes outward and confessional religious symptoms that 
are very real, yet are void of any behavioral and moral parallel. Hence their 
nominal characteristics involve boasting in:   
 
(a)  “The  name  ‘Jew.’”  A  “Jew”  was  originally  a  member  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  though  after  the  Babylonian  exile  the  name  more  broadly 
encompassed  any  Hebrew  or  citizen  of  Israel.  However,  while  Paul 
                                            
55
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 78. 
56
  Bunyan, Works, III, pp. 121-125. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  63
continued to call himself a Jew (Acts 22:3), here the boasting is one of 
racial  superiority  based  on  physical  descendancy,  physical  signification 
through circumcision, and physical nationalism. Yet he  
 
(b)  “The Law of Moses.” Literally the Jew “reclines” (cf. Luke 10:6) on the 
Law,  he  is  its  exclusive  custodian,  he  is  its  official  interpreter,  he  is  its 
visible embodiment, he claims that it is his ground of being and doing. 
Yet he does not obey the Law!  
 
(c)  “The  God  of  Abraham.”  Boasting  in  the  unique  and  only  true  God  of 
the  covenant  was  not  in  itself  wrong,  quite  to  the  contrary  (Jer.  9:23-
24); but such bragging was akin to the false recognition given to God by 
the  Pharisees  in  Matthew  23:14  and  Luke  18:11.  It  was  a  carnal 
security  that  neglected  personal  accountability.  John  Murray  adds: 
“That the apostle should have referred to this in connection with what 
is  by  implication  an  indictment  demonstrates  perhaps  more  than  any 
other  prerogative  enumerated  how  close  lies  the  grossest  vice  to  the 
highest  privilege  and  how  the  best  can  be  prostituted  to  the  service  of 
the worst.”
57
  
 
(2)  They are exercised in the Law, v. 18. 
 
While  being  eager  Bible  students  and  knowledgeable,  yet  they  are  like  the 
Pharisees  and  Sadducees  who  were  reprimanded  for  their  lack  of  biblical 
understanding (Matt. 22:29; John 5:39).  
 
(a)  They “know the [God’s] will,” unlike the Gentile (Ps. 147:19-20), that 
is they comprehend it agreeably.   
 
(b)  They  “approve  the  things  that  are  essential  [best],”  that  is  they 
especially appreciate the Shemah (Deut. 6:4), the Great Commandment 
(Deut. 6:5), and the Decalogue (Ex. 20:1-17).  
 
(c)  They have been well “instructed [catechized] out of the Law,” by both 
parents  (Deut.  6:6-7)  and  the  Jewish  leaders  (Lev.  10:11;  Deut. 
24:8:33:10; Neh. 8:8).   
 
(3)  They have the light of God, v. 19. 
 
From privileges and status we now move to perceived responsibilities which 
are inevitably corrupted. Here the Jew comprehends part of the truth, but it 
is the absent portion that results in the abuse of his partial knowledge. It is 
like believing in the resurrection of Jesus Christ while being ignorant of the 
purpose of this event. 
 
(a)  Israel was to have been “a guide to the blind” and “a light to those who 
are  in  darkness,”  of  course  supremely  through  Messiah  (Is.  42:6-7; 
                                            
57
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 82. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  64 
49:6; 60:1-3), though nationally as well (I Kings 8:41-43). What ought 
to have been is implicit in v. 24. 
 
(b)  However,  the  missionary  prayer  of  King  Solomon  was  not  heeded  (I 
Kings  8:57-61).  For  while  the  Jews  of  Paul’s  time  wanted  Gentile 
admiration  and  recognition  that  their  God  was  the  only  true  God  (I 
Kings 8:60), they were not prepared “to be wholly devoted to the Lord 
our  God,  to  walk  in  His  statutes  and  to  keep  His  commandments”  (I 
Kings 8:61).         
 
(4)  They have wisdom and truth, v. 20. 
 
There is no direct condemnation of the Jew here; rather it is implicit in terms 
of  the  hypocrisy  already  stated  in  vs.  1-8,  and  his  proud  and  lordly 
presentation of the truth.  
 
(a)  Yes, the Jew ought to “correct the foolish” and “teach the immature.” 
This  is  proper  pastoral  responsibility,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  also 
revealed the hypocrisy of the Jewish leaders in this regard (Matt. 23:1-
3).  
 
(b)  Yes,  the  Jew  ought  to  uphold  “the  Law,”  though  he  should  have 
understood  it  as  more  than  mere  “embodiment,”  or  mÒrfwsij,   
morpho¯ sis,  that  is  “outward  form”  or  “framework”  as  used  in  II 
Timothy 3:5.  
 
(5)  Application.  Before  Paul  “lowers  the  boom,”  so  to  speak,  there  is  a  fearful 
reality  presented  here,  and  that  of  the  most  insidious  hypocrisy.  For  just  as 
the  police  officer,  a  lawyer,  and  judge  have  sworn  to  uphold  the  law,  yet 
while presenting the posture of a law keeper, they actually break the law! So 
it  is  possible  for  a  Bible  teacher,  a  church  leader,  the  amen  chorus  of  the 
church,  to  be  no  less  hypocritical  than  the  Jew  here  described.  For  this 
reason, as with Paul here, it is vital that doctrine always be presented along 
with its necessary practical expression.            
 
b.  What do they do? vs. 21-23.  
 
Here is Paul’s sudden put-down and piercing response to the set-up of vs. 17-20. 
But  how  does  Paul  know  about  the  details  of  this  exposure?  Two  areas  are 
significant here. First, there was his rabbinical training in Jerusalem as a Pharisee 
that included tutelage under the esteemed Gamaliel (Acts 22:3; Phil. 3:5). Second, 
there was his instruction by way of special revelation from the Lord Jesus Christ 
(Gal. 1:11-12; I Cor. 11:23; 15:).
58
  
 
 
 
 
                                            
58
  Cf. J. Gresham Machen, The Origin Of Paul’s Religion, pp. 43-68. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  65
(1)  Knowing of teaching others, they do not teach themselves, v. 21a.  
 
(a)  Recalling  the  exalted  roll  of  teaching  in  Judaism,  even  as  he  had 
personified  while  being  rabidly  anti-Christian,  Paul  obviously  focuses 
on  those  exercising  a  responsible  position  of  religious  leadership, 
especially  the  Rabbi,  Pharisee  and  Scribe,  who  Isaiah  denounced  (Isa. 
50:1-20) and Christ exposed (Matt. 23:1-3; cf. Jas. 3:1). 
 
(b)  Similarly, Paul would today denounce conservative Christendom in this 
interrogative  manner.  It  is  the  measure  of  sinful  human  nature  that  a 
man or woman of any number or reputable professions or callings may 
in fact live a life that denies the creed he or she has formally confessed, 
the  politician  who  lives  one  way  and  campaigns  another,  the  doctor 
who  professes  the  Hippocratic  oath  and  performs  abortions,  the 
attorney who seeks ways to avoid the law he has sworn to uphold, the 
liberal  seminary  professor  who  signs  an  orthodox  doctrinal  statement 
and  teaches  a  liberal  agenda,  the  Sunday  School  teacher  who  sweetly 
moralizes to children and is immoral during the week, , the church choir 
member who sings a different song at home. 
 
(2)  Knowing of stealing, they steal, v. 21b. 
 
(a)  The Eighth Commandment is invoked with regard to the “preacher” or 
“proclaimer,”  who  would  use  his  position  of  influence  to  “devour 
widow’s houses” (Mark 12:40), to commit sophisticated larceny, under 
the guise of “needy religious causes”! 
 
(b)  However  is  Paul,  in  all  of  these  situations  as  here,  merely  addressing 
Jewish  leaders,  that  is  teachers  and  preachers,  and  not  the  common 
people? No since he seems to be addressing both categories in vs. 21-23, 
especially  in  the  light  of  v.  24  where  Israel’s  ungodly  reputation  is 
revealed in Isaiah 52:5 as being attributed to “the house of Israel, ” and 
“the  house  of  Israel”  in  Ezekiel  36:17-20.  There  is  also  the  possible 
inference  that  those  who  listen  as  pupils  are  no  better  than  their 
masters.  
 
(3)  Knowing of adultery, they are adulterous, v. 22a. 
 
(a)  The Seventh Commandment is invoked by the “sayer” of the Law, that 
is  concerning  “adultery,”  or  moice…a,  moicheia,  the  more  specific  term 
for sexual infidelity.  
 
(b)  But  what  of  the  many  who  might  claim  not  to  be  violators  of  this 
commandment? Surely Paul, the special student of the Lord Jesus, has in 
mind  here  not simply  the  “act”  but  also  the  “attitude”  of heart  (Matt. 
5:27-28).  In  John  8:6-9,  when  Jesus  Christ  writes  on  the  sand,  it  is  a 
reasonable  suggestion  that  he  wrote  specifically  of  the  similar  sins  of 
these  murderous  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  causing  them  to  retreat,  even 
their  method  of  legalizing  prostitution  by  means  of  allowing  quickie 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  66 
divorces  for  the  most  insignificant  marital  offences.
59
  Though  Moo’s 
comment  is  important  here,  that  “Paul’s  purpose  in  Romans  2  is  to 
convince  Jews  of  the  inadequacy  of  their  works.”
60
  Hence  the  Apostle 
focuses  on  the  experts  of  the  Law  to  show  the  demerit  of  their 
transgressions. 
 
(4)  Knowing of idolatry, they are pseudo-idolatrous, v. 22b. 
 
The  Second  Commandment  is  invoked  by  the  “abhorrer”  or  “loather”  of 
such objectionably odorous idolatry. Such a person, typical of Judaism, finds 
the stench of pagan worship to be revolting. But while Paul does not charge 
the  Jews  with  being  overt  idolaters,  he  does  infer  that  they  hypocritically 
“rob temples.” The KJV is less literal, “Dost thou commit sacrilege?” What 
does  he  mean  here?  In  general,  it  seems  that  while  the  Jew  was  expressly 
forbidden  from  gaining  personal  profit  from  a  captured  idol  (Deut.  7:25), 
yet  he  devised  ways  by  which  he  could  gain  and  at  the  same  time  skirt 
explicit transgression, as the Talmud illustrates of a Jew “taking an idol and 
selling it to a Gentile.”
61
  
 
(a)  The  actual  evidence  for  the  Jews,  contemporary  with  Paul,  literally 
“robbing  pagan  temples”  is  quite  slim.  Though  does  not  Acts  19:37 
suggest this possibility? 
 
(b)  Alternatively the Jews, contemporary with Paul, did avoid paying their 
tithes  and  temple  tax,  and  siphoned  off,  as  Josephus  indicates,  money 
due to the temple treasury.
62
  
 
(5)  Knowing of the Law, they break the Law, v. 23. 
 
(a)  This reiteration of vs. 17-22 is encompassing and not simply incidental. 
But  the  final  question  is  intended  to  be  humiliating  because  of  the 
assumed  truth  that  the  Jew  certainly  does  bring  shame  to  God’s 
character.  Murray  adds,  “Transgression  of  the  law  is  a  dishonoring  of 
God; it deprives him of the honor due to his name and offers insult to 
the majesty of which the law is an expression.
63
 
 
(b)  Application.  To  give  a  contemporary  paraphrase:  “You  who  proudly 
carry in your hand a gold embossed, fine leather, reliably translated, full 
reference  Bible,  and  vociferously  defend  its  full  inspiration,  and  at  the 
same time are reputed to be a cheat in your money dealings and morally 
loose, do you in fact insult the God of that same book?” The answer is 
“yes” in a manifold way. 
                                            
59
  Alfred Edersheim, The Life And Times Of Jesus The Messiah, II, pp. 333-334. 
60
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 165. 
61
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 137. 
62
  MacArthur, Romans 1-8, p. 157. 
63
  Murray, Romans, I, pp. 84-85. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  67
c.  What does the Law say about them? v. 24. 
 
Paul pointedly asks, “Do you in fact know what the Law you boast in [the Bible 
you carry] says about you?” So he quotes Isaiah 52:5, though Ezekiel 36:17-20 is 
more explicit (cf. II Pet. 2:2). 
 
(1)  Their lives are watched by the Gentiles, v. 24a. 
 
While  a  watching  world  ought  to  have  found  God  commended  in  the 
national  lifestyle  of  Israel  (I  Kings  8:59-60),  yet  the  opposite  was  the  case. 
This was the supreme shame in the midst of God’s creation.  
 
(2)  Their lives cause the Gentiles to blaspheme God, v. 24b. 
 
In  simple  terms  they  responded:  “If  God  is  reflected  by  these  obnoxious, 
complaining, hypocritical Jews who claim to be His chosen people, then we 
denounce that God as being a fraud, and partner to the crimes of the Jews.” 
So  as  John  MacArthur  well  comments  concerning  our  parallel  situation 
today:  “It  would  be  better  for  many  Christians,  true  believers  as  well  as 
false,  to  hide  their  religious  profession.  Their  living  is  such  an  obvious 
contradiction of Scripture that the cause of Christ is mocked and scorned by 
the world,”
64
    
   
d.  What significance is circumcision? vs. 25-29. 
 
An  observer  of  Paul’s  confrontation  with  the  Jew  might  well  ask  the  question: 
“How  is  it  possible  for  the  Jew  to  so  shamelessly  maintain  his  proud  self-esteem 
and nationalism in the face of such shameful condemnation by the Gentile?” as in 
v. 24. The answer, that really goes without saying, is in a word, “circumcision.” 
Whereas  the  current  teaching  was  that,  “no  person  who  is  circumcised  will  go 
down to Gehenna [hell as the lake of fire],”
65
 so Paul now commences to destroy 
the  religious  hypocrite’s  last  bastion,  namely  sacramental/ritual/covenantal 
regeneration.  
 
(1)  It is significant, not effecting, v. 25. 
 
(a)  Some  background  on  circumcision.  According  to  Genesis  17:9-14, 
circumcision  was  ordained  of  God  as  signification  of  the  covenant  He 
had  made  with  Abraham  and  his  seed.  For  this  reason  the  seed  organ 
was  cut.  Note  that  at  that  same  time,  the  name  “Abram”  meaning 
“exalted  father,”  was  changed  to  “Abraham”  meaning  “father  of  a 
multitude”  (Gen.  17:5).  As  a  modern  conservative  Jew  puts  it,  “For 
Jews  circumcision  today,  as  in  the  past  four  thousand  years,  is  not  a 
detail of hygiene. It is the old seal of the pledge between Abraham and 
his Creator, a sign in the flesh, a mark at the source of life.”
66
 However, 
                                            
64
  MacArthur, Romans 1-8, p. 158. 
65
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 167; also Hodge, Romans, p. 63. 
66
  Herman Wouk, This Is My God, p. 140. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  68 
even  Jeremiah  became  aware  that  a  physically  circumcised  Hebrew 
could yet be “uncircumcised of heart” (Jer. 9:25-26).  
 
(b)  Circumcision  is  “significant,”  that  is,  it  is  an  authentic  “sign”  when  it 
points to a “practicer of the Law.” But for the lawless, circumcision has 
no significance and in fact is invalidated; it is not regenerative. Later in 
4:9-12,  the  point  will  be  made  that  Abraham  was  justified  through 
faith, and hence regenerated, before he was circumcised. Therefore Paul 
is not repudiating circumcision as a sign of national Jewish identity, as 
3:1-2  indicates.  Rather  he  is  negating  a  function  of  circumcision  that 
never really existed. 
 
(c)  Application.  While  Christian  baptism  does  not  identify  with 
circumcision  in  every  regard,  yet  here  the  parallel  is  close.  Water 
baptism  is  significant  when  it  points  to  a  converted  or  regenerated 
heart, but it is impotent in producing regeneration. Nevertheless, many 
nominal  Christians  are  vainly  trusting  in  an  outward  washing  or 
sprinkling while their hearts remain unclean. Refer to C. H. Spurgeon’s 
confrontation  with  this  heresy  in  his  famous  sermon  titled  Baptismal 
Regeneration.
67
 
 
(2)  It is significant for the Gentile, vs. 26-27. 
 
The  implications  of  this  right  teaching  on  circumcision  are  encouraging  for 
the Gentile. Otherwise, he is ipso facto excluded from the favor and grace of 
God because of an absent physical qualification. 
 
(a)  His obedience is as circumcision, v. 26. 
 
Positing  that  a  Gentile  “keeps  the righteous  requirements of  the  Law,” 
this expression suggests the Mosaic law which an uncircumcised “God-
fearer” reveres and obeys, such as Cornelius (Acts 10:1-2; cf. 13:26), or 
a  lesser  disciple  of  the  God  of  Israel.  How  then  is  he  to  be  regarded? 
God will reckon circumcision to him, even as any observer ought to do, 
because  God  regards  the  doing  of  righteousness  as  the  justifying 
evidence of his sonship. He may not have the circumcision of Abraham, 
but he is nevertheless a child of Abraham because he does “the deeds of 
Abraham” (John 8:39).      
 
(b)  His obedience shames the transgressor, v. 27. 
 
If a Gentile has a heart for God, a heart that is alive to God, a heart that 
loves God, a heart that actively pleases God, and thus is circumcised of 
heart,  though  he  be  physically  uncircumcised,  this  man  is  the  judge  of 
the ungodly, circumcised Jew, since he pronounces shame upon him, he 
declares his hypocrisy (Matt. 8:5-12, especially vs. 11-12). 
 
                                            
67
  C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, X, 573. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  69
1)  The  word  “judge”  is  emphatic  here,  and  it  relates  to  the  Jew 
“having the letter of the Law.” This circumcised religionist has the 
Bible in his hand and mind, a comprehensive data bank, doctrinal 
comprehension,  but  his  disgraceful  godlessness  will  ensure  severe 
condemnation by the mere presence of the godly Gentile, without a 
word being spoken (Phil. 3:2-3).   
 
2)  Illustration.  In  an  office  situation,  the  unbaptized  member  of  The 
Salvation  Army  who  manifests  genuine  graces  of  the  Spirit  will 
stand  out  in  obvious  silent  judgment  upon  the  baptized  Baptist 
who manifests the works of the flesh. 
 
(3)  It is significant for the real Jew, vs. 28-29. 
 
The  definition  of  an  authentic  Jew,  especially  for  Paul  here,  is  a  matter  of 
different  opinions  by  conservative  Christians.  Some  suggest  that  in  this 
church  age,  it  is  the  true  Christian  who  is  now  the  real  and  only  spiritual 
Jew, and that since God has finished forever with Israel as a nation, there is 
no such thing in His sight as a national Jew. This I believe is not what Paul 
has  in  mind  here,  especially  in  the  light  of  3:1-2;  11:1-36;  Acts  22:3;  Gal. 
6:16. A genuine Jew is one who, having been circumcised of the heart, is also 
circumcised of the flesh, and identifies geographically with those of the same 
commitment, cf. 9:6.    
 
(a)  It does not signify a real Jew, v. 28. 
 
A literal translation reads, “For not the one in outward manifestation is 
a  Jew,  neither  is  the  one  in  the  outward  manifestation  of  fleshy 
circumcision.” What is it that essentially identifies a Jew? Negatively, it 
is not the outward rite of circumcision, even though the rite itself is not 
nullified (3:1-2; Acts 16:3). At best, circumcision identifies a professing 
Jew. 
 
(b)  It does signify heart circumcision, v. 29. 
 
1)  The sine qua non of true Jewishness is “heart circumcision” which 
operation  is  “by  the  Spirit,”  which  is  more  probable  than  “in  the 
spirit,”  though  as  Morris  writes,  “either  way  gives  good  sense,”
68
 
(cf.  7:6;  II  Cor.  3:6-7).  In  such  a  case,  the  true  Jew  receives  his 
affirmation of Jewishness from God, which for him is what really 
matters, and not as was commonly sought in Paul’s time according 
to “the letter,” the praise of man (John 5:41-44). Above all else, a 
true  Jew  has  a  heart  that  is  made  by  God,  owned  of  God,  and 
consecrated to God.  
 
 
                                            
68
  Morris,  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  p.  142.  “Spirit”  is  supported  by  Calvin,  Hodge,  Moo,  Morris,  Murray, 
“spirit” by Haldane, Lloyd-Jones, Shedd.  
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  70 
2)  Illustration. Dr. Lloyd-Jones concludes this section as follows:  
If we want to make sure that we are unlike the Jews in this respect 
[that Paul is challenging], we must examine ourselves. The Jews did 
not,  they  never  would.  They  put  up  this  citadel  around  themselves 
and said, ‘We are the Jews, you must not talk to us. Go and preach 
to the Gentiles, do not preach to us.’ They are like the lady, if I may 
say  so,  who  once  complained  of  my  preaching  in  Westminster 
Chapel  and  said,  ‘This  man  preaches  to  us  as  if  we  are  sinners!’ 
Unthinkable!  You  see,  if  you  erect  that  kind  of  citadel  around 
yourself  you  will  never  know  that  you  are  a  hypocrite.  .  .  .  So  let 
every  man  examine  himself.  Let  us  take  these  searching  questions 
which Paul addresses to these Jews of old and let us turn them upon 
ourselves.  .  .  .  You  can  only  be  sure  that  you  have  answered  them 
truly  and  faced  them  honestly  when  you  look  at  yourself  and  say, 
‘In  me,  that  is  to  say,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing,’  when 
you abhor yourself and hate yourself, and get down on your knees 
quietly, in your own room, not on the street corner, not in a public 
place,  but  in  your  own  room  with  the  door  shut  and  the  blinds 
drawn and acknowledge it before God and break your heart before 
Him,  reminded  again  that  if  we  do  confess  our  sins  He  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  and  so  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness  [I  John  1:9].  Oh,  may  God  give  us  honesty  and 
truth  in  our  inward  parts  that  we  may  allow  the  Scriptures  to 
search us.
69
  
 
3.  The Jew’s status before God, 3:1-8. 
 
Most translations reveal a barrage of nine questions in these eight verses.
70
 Clearly they 
represent the anticipation of Paul to vociferous objections from the Jew who struggles 
to  feel  secure  through  covenant  circumcision  in  view  of  his  unmasked  hypocrisy.  The 
preceding context could especially cause the carnal Jew to question the viability of his 
national existence.  
 
a.  Concerning Jewish identity, vs. 1-2. 
 
A  literal  translation  here  reads:  “Therefore  what  advantage  does  the  Jew  have? 
What  is  the  profit  of  belonging  to  the  circumcision?”  There  are  two  parallel 
statements here so that “the circumcision” is a synonym, and an appropriate one 
here, for “the Jew.”
71
 
 
 
 
                                            
69
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 2:1-3:20 p. 158. 
70
  It is for this reason that many commentators, including Lloyd-Jones and Moo, regard this passage as one of 
the most difficult to interpret in Romans. 
71
  Morris  seems  almost  alone  in  pointing  out  the  use  of  the  definite  article  here  so  that  “the  Jew”  and  “the 
circumcision”  are  in  parallel,  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  p.  152.  Paul  does  not  forget  to  defend  circumcision; 
rather he is speaking of corporate identity in both expressions, (cf. ¹ peritom», he¯ peritome¯, Rom. 4:9; Gal. 
2:7-9; Phil. 3:3;.1:10).  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  71
(1)  Is the Jew still privileged? v. 1. 
 
In  the  midst  of  his  strong  condemnation  of  the  Jew  who  trusts  in  external 
religious  insignia,  Paul  has  plainly  stated  in  2:25  that  there  is  “value,”  the 
same Greek word as “benefit” here in 3:1, in circumcision when it identifies 
the Israelite who evidently is circumcised of heart. Paul has not declared that 
Judaism does not exist anymore, as he will later expound upon in chapters 9-
11.  
 
(2)  Yes, through the oracles of God, v. 2. 
 
Concerning  this  forthright  answer  here,  Murray  comments  that,  “Paul  was 
not  afraid  of  being  accused  of  bibliolatry  when  he  thus  assessed  the 
inscripturated Word.”
72
 In other words, the written Word of God is identical 
to the spoken Word of God (II Tim. 3:16; II Pet. 1:19-21). 
 
(a)  Preeminently or chiefly, to Israel and no other nation has been given the 
sacred  trust,  the  great  responsibility  of  being  the  custodians  of  “the 
oracles of God” or literally “the speakings of God,” t¦ lÒgia toà qeoà, 
ta logia tou theou, and circumcision identifies those who belong to such 
a  privileged  race.  The  point  is  that  God  has  not  only  given  an 
inscripturated  book  to  His  people,  but  He  has  spoken  to  them 
exclusively  in  a  personal  way  giving  many  immutable  promises  (Deut. 
4:7-8;  Ps.  147:19-20)  .  Thus  to  the  Israelites  belong  “the  adoption  as 
sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the 
temple service and the promises, whose are the fathers, and from whom 
is the Christ according to the flesh,” 9:4-5.  
 
(b)  Thus the Christian is forever indebted to the Jew in this as well as other 
numerous  ways.  Concerning  the  Jewish  Masoretes  who,  during  the 
ninth  century,  produced  the  present  text  of  the  Old  Testament,  F.  F. 
Bruce writes that,  
they  treated  it  [the  Old  Testament  text]  with  the  greatest  imaginable 
reverence, and devised a complicated system of safeguards against scribal 
slips.  They  counted,  for  example,  the number  of  times  each  letter  of  the 
alphabet  occurs  in  each  book;  they  pointed  out  the  middle  letter  of  the 
Pentateuch  and  the  middle  letter  of  the  whole  Hebrew  Bible,  and  made 
even  more  detailed  calculations  than  these.  .  .  .  and  they  made  up 
mnemonics by which the various totals might be readily remembered.
73
 
 
(c)  Illustration. Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments:  
But  I  want  to  emphasize  this  by  putting  it  to  you  negatively.  If  the 
greatest privilege that can ever come to man is to be spoken to directly by 
God, it is equally true to say that there is no greater loss that a man can 
suffer  than  that  God  should  cease  to  speak  to  him.  ‘Behold’,  says  the 
                                            
72
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 93. 
73
  F. F. Bruce, The Books and the Parchments, p. 117. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  72 
prophet  Amos,  threatening  a  recalcitrant  people,  ‘Behold,  the  days  are 
come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a 
famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water,  but  of  hearing  the  words  of  the 
Lord’ [Amos 8:11]. . . . The Christian is a man who ought to be wretched 
and miserable if he feels that he does not hear God speaking to him.
74
 
 
b.  Concerning Jewish unbelief, vs. 3-4. 
 
Paul’s theoretical (? cf. v. 8) antagonist is still smarting from the condemnation of 
2:17-29.  Hence,  at  the  mention  of  “the  oracles  of  God,”  he  recalls  that  this 
present state of unbelief parallels Israel’s past history even back to the rebellion in 
the  Sinai  wilderness.  At  the  same  time,  back  of  this  recollection  and  the  whole 
argument  is  foundational  trust  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant  which  the  Jew  clings 
to,  notwithstanding  disobedience  to  “the  oracles  of  God.”  If  this  covenant  is 
unconditional, is not Israel’s existence guaranteed?   
 
(1)  Does unbelief nullify God’s promise, v. 3. 
 
Translate  as  follows:  “If  some  of  them  were  unfaithful  [in  Israel’s  past 
history],  will  not  their  unfaithfulness  nullify  the  faithfulness  of  God?”  As 
Hodge well explains:  
Has he [God] not promised to be a God to Abraham and to his seed? Has he 
not  entered  into  a  solemn  covenant  to  grant  his  people  all  the  benefits  of  the 
Messiah’s kingdom? This covenant is not suspended on our moral character. If 
we  adhere  to  the  covenant  by  being  circumcised  and  observing  the  law,  the 
fidelity of God is pledged for our salvation. We may therefore be as wicked as 
you would make us out to be, that does not prove that we shall be treated as 
heathen.
75
  
 
(2)  No, since God remains true, v. 4. 
 
(a)  Paul’s  immediate  response  is  the  strongest  possible  Greek  negative,  m¾ 
gšnoito,  me¯  genoito,  “May  it  never  be,”  or,  “it  is  unthinkable,”  or 
“perish the thought.” He is repulsed by such tricky reasoning, typical of 
casuistry. 
 
(b)  Such reasoning impugns the character of God since it makes Him to be 
indifferent  to  unrighteousness  amongst  His  people,  or  complicit  in  the 
tolerance  of  sin;  it  is  repulsive  in  terms  of  it  demeaning  His  holiness. 
Rather,  in  the  midst of  a  world  where  every man  is  a  liar  and  godless, 
let  the  fact  reign  that  God  alone  is  righteous  and  true.  In  a  world  of 
pervasive  wickedness,  let  the  truth  of  God’s  integrity  be  upheld  in 
judgment  (as  vs.  5-6  demand)  along  with  covenant  faithfulness  (Neh. 
9:32-33; Ps. 96:13; Amos 3:2). 
 
                                            
74
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 2:1-3:20, pp. 168-69. 
75
  Hodge, Romans, p. 70. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  73
(c)  Paul quotes the Septuagint version of Psalm 51:4 to support his defense 
of  God’s  character.  David,  in  admitting  his  total  guilt,  was  in  effect 
saying  that  should  anyone  rise  to  defend  him,  then  let  his  unqualified 
confession  vindicate  his  judgment  by  God.  In  other  words,  let  God’s 
judgment  stand  as  true  and  right.  So  here,  though  the  whole  world 
should  testify  falsely,  let  God’s  character  stand  as  true  and  right;  let 
God,  above  all  else,  be  vindicated  as  just  and  righteous  in  every 
situation.  
 
(d)  Application. But is not the same sort of reasoning found in the Christian 
church  today?  It  is  the  attitude  that  clings  to  an  evangelistic  decision 
and  baptism  and  church  membership  and  the  doctrine  of  eternal 
security  as  the  guarantees  of  going  to  heaven,  in  spite  of  disinterest  in 
spiritual  truth  and  blatant  godlessness.  But  such  belief  insults  God’s 
character and the power of His gospel. Rather, true Christians shall be 
saved and false Christians shall be judged, and God shall be vindicated 
as always just.  
 
c.  Concerning God’s righteousness, vs. 5-6.  
 
The  perverse  line  of  reasoning  increases  in  its  intensity.  While  the  previous 
argument of vs. 3-4 dealt with “their unbelief” in relation to God’s firm covenant 
with  Abraham,  here,  in  a  similar  vein,  the  suggestion  concerning  “our 
unrighteousness” is a blatant and clever attempt to justify sin, to even present it as 
beneficial.  Surely  Paul  draws  from  experience  in  personal  encounter  here,  and  is 
not merely theoretical. And surely the tenor of the argument is Jewish. 
 
(1)  Does God’s faithfulness oppose His wrath? v 5. 
 
(a)  Major premise: “our unrighteousness demonstrates the righteousness of 
God.” In other words, there are advantages to sin, and God ought not 
to overlook them; He should tolerate sin. 
 
(b)  Major  conclusion:  “therefore  God  would  be  unjust  to  inflict  judgment 
upon  those  sinners  who  instrumentally  enable  God’s  righteousness  to 
shine.” But this is not necessarily so since God was righteous before sin 
actively  originated.  A  rose  in  the  midst  of  weeds  has  outstanding 
beauty,  yet  in  standing  alone  its  beauty  remains.  Evil  means  do  not 
justify good ends.  
 
(c)  The  prime  concern  of  the  troubled  antagonist  here  using  Rabbinical 
argumentation,
76
  is  that  of  God’s  “inflicted  wrath,”  which  plainly 
indicates that the wrath of God, cf. 1:18; 2:5, is more than an attitude; 
it involves active punishment.  
 
 
 
                                            
76
  William G. T. Shedd, Commentary on Romans, p. 65. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  74 
(2)  No, since He is also Judge of the world, v. 6. 
 
Paul’s  revulsion  at  such  a  line  of  argumentation,  the  shamelessness  of  it,  is 
indicated  by  his  care  in  personally  distancing  himself  from  it  by  having 
declared  in  v.  5,  “I  speak  according  to  human  fashion.”  Now  follows  his 
repeated  categorical  denial  of  such  even  more  obnoxious  casuistry,  cf.  v.  4. 
The logical response is to declare that such reasoning in fact paralyzes God’s 
righteous dealings with man, His judgment of man. Why? Because any sin in 
the  universe  would  inevitably  be  confronted  with  God’s  righteousness.  But 
this  being  so,  then  all  sin,  in  enabling  such  a  reflection,  would  have  to  be 
tolerated. Thus God would never be able to in fact judge any form of sin. As 
Hodge writes, Paul’s “answer is complete and satisfactory; it is a reductio ad 
absurdum.”
77
 
 
d.  Concerning God’s glory, v. 7-8. 
 
Paul’s theoretical(?) antagonist, now extends the argument to a yet lower level of 
reasoned  depravity.  For  to  suggest  that  sin  should  be  tolerated  so  as  to  reflect 
God’s righteousness is one thing; but then to recommend the propagation of sin so 
that God’s greater glory and goodness be displayed is to sink to an all time low.  
 
(1)  Why judge a Jewish sinner who glorifies God? v. 7. 
 
The  argument  here  is  similar  to  that  of  v.  5,  though  there  seems  to  be  a 
throwback to vs. 21-23 as well. That is, Paul’s Jewish opponent is reasoning, 
if  you  charged  me  with  law  breaking,  then  I  also  charge  you  with  law 
mishandling.  If  I  lie  with  the  result  that  the  contrasting  truth  of  God  being 
declared upholds His glory, then why should I be judged as a sinner? Should 
I not be allowed to continue being a stimulus to God’s glory? 
 
(2)  Why not allow evil to be a stimulus to good? v. 8. 
 
We  take  the  main  thrust  of  this  verse  to  be  an  extension  of  the  Jewish 
argument of v. 7, and not Paul’s response.
78
  
 
(a)  This  logical  extension  of  the  thought  of  v.  7  suggests,  perhaps  with  a 
proud  sneer,  that  the  promotion  of  evil  will  in  turn  promote  greater 
good.  So  again,  Paul’s  former  condemnation  of  Jewish  sinners  is  really 
counter- productive; it opposes the promotion of God’s glory!  
 
(b)  In  the midst  of  this  wicked  inference,  Paul  suddenly  injects  a  comment 
that  indicates  that  he  himself  has  been  charged  with  such  slander  or 
blasphemy, blasfhmšw, blasphe¯meo¯ . This recalls the charge of 6:1 and 
the  perverse  accusation  that  Paul’s  gospel  promotes  licentiousness, 
                                            
77
  Hodge, Romans, p. 74. 
78
  The commencement of v. 8 with ka… rather than dš is decisive here. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  75
though the parallel is not exact.
79
 In other words Paul responds, “What 
you  recommend,  I  have  already  been  charged  with  and  strenuously 
denied.  The  principle  of  your  reasoning  is  an  affront  to  God’s 
righteousness and grace.”     
 
(c)  Thus Paul curtly responds, “Their judgment is just.” The distortion and 
absurdity  of  such  a  challenge  requires  no  further  comment,  especially 
since  the  response  of  v.  6  is  equally  applicable  here.  That  is,  if  evil  be 
promoted for the prosperity of good, then it is impossible for evil to be 
judged. As Hodge comments: “By reducing the reasoning of the Jews to 
a conclusion shocking to the moral sense, he thereby refutes it.”
80
  
 
(3)  Application. While the Jew is specifically the object of Paul’s concern here, it 
is also true that the religious Gentile is represented. It seems that the religious 
person  in  particular  is so  adept at justifying his  ungodliness;  he  is  devilishly 
clever  in  maintaining  a  cloak  of  righteousness  while  inwardly  there  is 
nurtured every manner of evil (Matt. 23:25-28). In simple terms, the charges 
that Paul has been facing in 3:3-8 fall into two timeless categories. 
 
(a)  Presumption in the face of God’s grace, faithfulness, and forbearance. 
 
Through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  or  baptism  or  church 
membership, my sovereign covenant status with God makes me secure. 
Therefore  I  need  not  worry  about  personal  sin;  in  fact  I  should  sin  all 
the  more  so  as  to  really  enter  into  the  greater  riches  of  grace.  This  is 
human depravity at its worst and evidence of counterfeit faith.  
 
(b)  Making excuses for and rationalizing personal sin.  
 
This  religious  person  has  been  particularly  disturbed  by  Paul’s  surgical 
exposure  of  deep  corruption  in  2:17-24.  He  writhes  in  the  pain  of 
personal  guilt;  but  instead  of  expressing  repentance,  he  uses  contorted 
and  deceitful  logic  to  excuse  himself.  This  is  human  evil  at  its  worst 
which Isaiah 5:20-21 denounces, “Woe to those who call evil good, and 
good evil; who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness; who 
substitute  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter!  Woe  to  those  who  are 
wise in their own eyes, and clever in their own sight.” Thomas Manton 
comments  on  these  verses:  “When  men  lean  upon  their  own  wisdom, 
they can expect to make no better judgment. Reason is not only blind, 
but  mad.  .  .  .  Every  sin  hath  a  thousand  shifts  and  fig-leaves.  .  .  . 
Therefore take  heed  of  making  your bosom  your  oracle  and neglecting 
constant application to God for wisdom.”
81
 
 
 
                                            
79
  “In chapter 6 Paul is dealing with the abuse applied to the doctrine of grace, whereas in 3:5-8 he is dealing 
with an assault upon the justice or rectitude of God.” Murray, Romans, I, p. 98. 
80
  Hodge, Romans, p. 75. 
81
  Manton, Works, XV, pp. 217-18. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  76 
C.  THE JEWS AND GENTILES ARE THOROUGH SINNERS, 3:9-20 
 
In all of Scripture there is surely no passage which so compactly and comprehensively indicts 
the  human  race  as  being  thoroughly  sinful  as  in  vs.  10-20  here,  even  as  there  is  surely  no 
passage  which  so  compactly  and  comprehensively  presents  the  gospel  to  all  of  the  human 
race  as  in  vs.  21-26  that  follow.  This  leads  us  to  reflect  upon  what  is  such  an  important 
factor  with  regard  to  our  basic  understanding  of  anthropology,  that  is  whether  man  is 
essentially  good  or  evil.  Here  biblical  Christianity  is  adamant  that  man’s  bent  is  toward 
unrighteousness,  and  upon  this  premise  western  civilization  has  been  built.  On  the  other 
hand, the assumption of humanism, secularism, and materialism that man is essentially good 
or  amoral  has  not  only  required  a  focus  that  is  myopic  and  highly  selective,  but  is  also  a 
stubborn  refusal  to  face  the  clearest  evidence  on  a  universal  scale  of  man’s  natural 
corruption.  Upon  one’s  convictions  in  this  area  will  be  determined  one’s  convictions 
concerning  government,  law  and  order,  education,  child-rearing,  and  social  relations  in 
general.  
 
1.  The universality of sin declared, v. 9. 
 
a.  An  understanding  of  the  main  thrust  of  this  verse  is  not  difficult,  although  one 
word remains exceedingly difficult.
82
 We might put it this way, “What then? Are 
we  [Jews/Christians/Gentiles?]  better/more  advantaged  than  they?”  or 
alternatively “excusing ourselves?” The negative response and context suggests, as 
most translations state: “What then? Are we [Jews] better than they? Not at all.” 
 
b.  Paul  the  Jew,  in  identifying  with  a  common  Jewish  form  of  boasting,  yet 
repudiates  such  a  claim.  Thus,  “Are  we  Jews  superior,  in  view  of  our  covenant 
standing  2:17,  and  advantages  3:2,  and  therefore  qualify  for  judgment 
concessions,  which  the  Gentile  has  no  hope  of  receiving?”  No,  in  terms  of 
standing  before  God,  the  only  test  is  manifest  righteousness  or  unrighteousness, 
whatever the racial background may be. Here this prelude to the gospel knows of 
no recognition of racial superiority (Gal. 3:26-29). Here there is also no place for 
anti-gentilism by Jews or anti-semitism by Gentiles. 
 
c.  The reason that Paul gives for disallowing racial partiality on God’s part indicates 
the  grand  purpose  of  1:18-3:20,  namely  that  he  might  “charge/accuse”  both  the 
Jew  and  Gentile.  He  has  intended  to  meticulously  slay  human  boasting  of 
whatever sort and at the same time bring about a humiliation of man as being, not 
only thoroughly polluted, but also wholly captive to sin.  
 
d.  Thus man, the whole human race, Jew and Gentile, are “all under sin.” The “all” 
factor  of  total  and  comprehensive  universality  will  be  taken  up  in  the  proof  that 
follows  in  vs.  10-18.  The  fact  of  all  being  “under  sin,”  demands  further 
consideration. This term, Øp[Õ] ¡mart…an, hupo hamartian, while literally meaning 
“under sin,” has a far stronger content, since it indicates being under captivity to 
sin,  under  the  reign  and  dominion  of  sin,  under  sin’s  lordship.  The  point  is  than 
                                            
82
  The textual problem concerns the meaning of proecÒmeqa, proechometha, and whether it be interpreted as a 
middle  or  passive  voice.  Older  support  for  the  middle  voice,  as  followed  here  includes  Luther,  Calvin,  then 
Alford, Hodge, Shedd, and more recently Moo. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  77
mankind  is  not  merely  on  parole,  he  is  not  in  a  limited  detention  center,  but 
incarcerated in such a way that it is impossible for him to escape, at least humanly 
speaking. In other words, human nature is wholly enslaved to sin, and according 
to  his  nature,  so  man  will  respond.  The  extent  of  this  enslavement  will  also  be 
illustrated in the verses that follow.  
 
(1)  By way of illustration, Dr. Martyn Lloyd-Jones comments: 
If you visited a foreign country, the thing which would be of primary interest 
to  the  people  of  that  country,  the  first thing  they  would  want  to  know  about 
you,  is  not  the  color  of  your  hair  or  your  eyes,  not  your  bank  balance,  or 
whether  you  are  a  nice  person  -  the  first  thing  they  would  want  to  know  is 
what  country  you  belong  to.  Are  you  a  citizen  of  this  country  or  are  you  a 
foreigner? They would want to know the realm to which you belong. And that 
is something which is absolutely basic to a true understanding of the Christian 
faith,  the  Christian  gospel.  It  does  not  start  with  details.  And  that  is  where 
many people go wrong about this gospel - the people who think that if you are 
living a good life you are a Christian. You may live a very good life and not be 
a  Christian  at  all  because  you  are  not  in  that  realm.  There  are  good  people 
under  sin,  in  the  realm  and  dominion  of  Satan.  It  is  the  realm  to  which  you 
belong that really matters and really counts. Now then, Paul says - and this is 
the staggering statement - all, both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin, under the 
dominion  of  sin,  and  belong  to  the  realm  of  sin.  That  statement,  of  course, 
includes  such  things  as  this:  that  all  mankind  by  nature  is  under  the  guilt  of 
sin,  under  the  power  of  sin,  and  under  the  pollution  of  sin.  It  is  his 
fundamental statement, and everything else follows from this.
83
  
 
(2)  In I John 5:19 we read, “We know that we are of God, and the whole world 
lies in the power of the evil one.” Here our perspective of man “under sin” is 
adjusted,  since  this  subjection  is  also  “under  the  evil  one.”  If  man  is  under 
sin, at the same time he is in subjection to the realm of Satan; his citizenship 
is  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  Hence  the  child  of  God  is  an  alien  and 
transient in this realm, and constantly subject to harassment; but the child of 
this  world  is  at  home  in  this  environment,  and  readily  yields  under  its 
overwhelming authority. 
 
2.  The universality of sin inscripturated, vs. 10-18. 
 
This  montage  of  Bible  passages,  drawn  from  the  Septuagint,  has  every  indication  of 
being carefully crafted, especially when the repeated emphasis on universal corruption 
is noted in vs. 10-12, while a contrasting focus follows on individual body parts in vs. 
13-18.
84
  Alfred  Edersheim  describes  such  a  collection  of  closely  related  passages  of 
Scripture according to the rabbinic expression, “the stringing together of pearls.”
85
 This 
                                            
83
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 2:1-3:20, pp. 189-90. 
84
  Murray  well  states  the  purpose  here:  “The  apostle  places  together  various  passages  which  when  thus 
combined  provide  a  unified  summary  of  the  witness  of  the  Old  Testament  to  the  pervasive  sinfulness  of 
mankind.”  The  result  is  “the  precipitate  of  the  Biblical  teaching and  it  is  particularly  relevant  to  the  charge 
made in verse 9 that all are under sin.” Romans, pp. 102, 103. 
85
  Alfred Edersheim, The Life And Times Of Jesus The Messiah, I, p. 449. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  78 
concluding  statement  purposely  draws  attention  to  the  finality  of  what  God  has 
repeatedly declared. 
 
a.  The breadth of human depravity, vs. 10-12. 
 
“As it is written” could be more literally expressed, “As is has been written.” The 
perfect  tense  of  gšgraptai,  gegraptai,  as  frequently  used  in  the  New  Testament 
regarding the timeless authority of Scripture, means that the truth was written in 
the past and still stands written in the present with the same authority (Matt. 2:5; 
4:6-  7,  10).  This  section  relates  directly  or  indirectly  to  Psalm  14:1-3;  53:1-3; 
Ecclesiastes  7:20,  and  presses  home  the  thorough  pollution  of  the  human  race. 
Jonathan Edwards comments concerning Paul’s emphasis here:  
If the words which the apostle uses, do not most fully and determinately signify an 
universality [of sin], no words ever used in the Bible are sufficient to do it. I might 
challenge any man to produce any one paragraph in Scripture, from the beginning to 
the end, where there is such a repetition and accumulation of terms so strongly, and 
emphatically, and carefully to express the most perfect and absolute universality [of 
sin].
86
 
 
(1)  None are righteous, v. 10. 
 
Paul  gives  first  place  to  his  quintessential  term,  “righteous/righteous- 
ness/justify.”  The  standard  required  of  God  must  be  His  perfect 
righteousness  (Lev.  19:2;  Matt.  5:48),  and  thus  all  men  are  unrighteous. 
Note  that  concerning  the  use  here  of  Psalm  14:1-3,  David  addresses  the 
“atheistic fool” in v. 1 to begin with; then he moves from the particular in v. 
1  to  the  more  universal  in  vs.  2-3.  This  statement  is  not  considering  or 
denying particular grace, or variations in civil behavior on a horizontal level; 
it simply has regard to the whole human race, as the seed of Adam (5:12), in 
the sight of God, which therefore qualifies for judgment. If man attempts to 
relieve  his  feelings  of  guilt  by  considering  himself  with  other  men,  on  a 
relative basis, he deceives himself; there is even honor among thieves and the 
Mafia.  Bur  what  really  counts  is  God’s  estimate  of  myself  in  the  ultimate 
“Supreme  Court”!  Note  the  climactic  parallelism,  that  is  the  climax  of 
absolute exclusiveness.
87
  
 
(2)  None understand God, v. 11a. 
 
That  is,  no human  being  has  rightly  discovered  God,  or  even  independently 
understood  God  in  terms  of  His  revelation  of  Himself,  both  general  and 
special.  The  finite  cannot  discover  the  infinite;  man’s  focus  is  distorted 
because his perspective is always filtered through the dirty lenses in his soul. 
As  a  result  he  has  “foolish  understanding”  (I  Cor.  2:14),  that  is  “darkened 
understanding”  (Eph.  4:13).  As  Haldane  states,  “All  men  are  naturally 
                                            
86
  Edwards, Works, I, p. 194. 
87
  The  categories  of  Hebrew  parallelism  used  here  are  taken  from  Ronald  Barclay  Allen,  Praise!  A  Matter  Of 
Life And Breath, pp. 50-54. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  79
ignorant  of  God,  and  by  neglecting  the  one  thing  needful,  show  no 
understanding. They act more irrationally than beasts.”
88
 
 
(3)  None seek for God, v. 11b. 
 
This  second  line  completes  the  synthetic  parallelism  in  v.  11,  that  is  the 
developed  thought  and  further  details  added  to  the  first  line.  Many  in  this 
world seek after understanding, but we are talking exclusively about the only 
living God of Abraham, and such understanding is not detached, but rather 
involves the pursuit of the whole heart, a passionate and singular thirst (Ps. 
119:2,  10,  58).  Notwithstanding  God’s  particular  invitations  (Isa.  55:6;  Jer. 
29:13),  man  avidly  seeks  after  religion  and  a  pantheon  of  other  gods, 
designer gods, security blanket gods, sentimental gods, all counterfeits.  
 
(4)  None are profitable, v. 12a. 
 
Because they “are inclined to lean away from [God],” ™kkl…nw, ekklino¯ , it is 
inevitable they “become useless,” that is like sour milk, moldy cheese, a bad 
apple,  bitter  fruit,  stale  bread,  rancid  meat,  etc.  The  corruption  may  have 
variety to it, but the root cause is defection from God, just as Adam and Eve 
fled from God (Gen. 3:8-9) with resulting universal consequences. 
 
(5)  None do good, v. 12b. 
 
In  2:4,  the  “kindness”  (NASB,  NIV)  or  “goodness”  (NKJV)  of  God  is 
described,  the  word  being  crhstÒthj,  chre¯stote¯s.  Shedd  describes  this 
characteristic  as  follows.  It  is  “not  the  attribute  by  which  God  is  good 
(holiness),  but  by  which  he  does  good  (benevolence).”
89
  So  here,  none  does 
that  which  is  morally  good  according  to  God’s  estimate  because  he  has  the 
wrong  inclination.  Note  that  whereas  v.  10  speaks  of  a  state  of  righteous 
being, here the conclusion of this section speaks of doing righteousness as a 
result of being, and in terms of Paul’s argument to this point, 2:17-24, this is 
a vital matter.  
 
(6)  None is without exception, v. 12c. 
 
Surely Paul is motivated here on account of the tendency of individuals who 
claim  to  be  exceptions  to  the  universal  rule  that  has  been  declared.  Sinful 
man  delights  in  nominating  himself  as  exceptional!  The  expression  here 
intimates the comment: “But surely even just one might be the exception here 
on account of a special life that has been particularly good!” The response is 
an  absolute  and  emphatic,  “No!”
90
  The  awful  truth  is  that  none  of  us  is 
exceptional,  and  just  in  case  we  think  otherwise,  the  following  vs.  13-18 
force us to face ourselves individually.  
                                            
88
  Haldane, Romans, p. 126. 
89
  Shedd, Commentary on Romans, p. 37.  
90
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 167n. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  80 
b.  The depth of human depravity, vs. 13-18. 
 
When you tell a man that all men, including himself, are sinners, he still attempts 
to  find  refuge  in  the  fact  that  there  remains  a  certain  camaraderie  in  such  a 
corrupt association, which is very much misplaced. Some, in jest, will express the 
fact  that  in  hell  they  will  have  plenty  of  company,  that  Satan  will  not  be  lonely, 
etc. Though the foolishness of such a conclusion is well illustrated by our common 
antipathy to the dentist’s chair. When we painfully suffer in that situation, do we 
find  solace  in  the  fact  that  at  that  very  time,  and  throughout  the  country, 
thousands of others are in fellowship with us in our hour of trial? No, of course 
not!  So  here  Paul  presses  on  with  his  conclusion  in  such  a  way  that  leading  us 
from universal guilt to particular and thorough guilt, we finally cease to contrive 
excuses and shut out mouths under the weight of just condemnation.  
The  argument  here  revolves  around  body  parts,  six  in  all  being  controlled  by  a 
bad  heart,  though  five  of  these  are  associated  with  the  head.  The  first  four  all 
relate  to  speaking  which  is  but  a  venting  of  a  wicked  soul.  This  section  relates 
directly or indirectly to Psalms 5:9; 10:7; 36:1; 140:3; Isaiah 59:7-8. Paul seems to 
have purposely selected these verses for the reason that the distinctive body parts, 
each being an instrument of corruption, plainly describe the thorough corruption 
of  the  individual.  When  a  man  understands  his  own  sinfulness  in  this  light,  he 
realizes the absurdity, indeed the impossibility of his ability to live righteously and 
acceptably  in  God’s  sight  since,  “a  bad  tree  [cannot]  produce  good  fruit”  (Matt. 
7:18). So Lloyd-Jones warns: “Are you ready for me to hold before you now the 
most  terrifying  mirror  that  you  have  ever  looked  into  in  your  life?  I  warn  you 
now,  if  you  want  to  be  on  good  terms  with  yourself,  you  had  better  read  no 
further.”
91
 
 
(1)  Their throat has the stench of sin, v. 13a. 
 
The  open  throat,  being  the  upper  vent  of  the  thoracic  region  of  the  human 
body,  is  especially  useful  for  burping,  though  not  necessarily  so  for  friends 
when  we  have  been  eating  garlic  or  onions!  So,  quoting  Psalm  5:9,  the 
outrush of speaking from a putrid heart is likened to the foul updraught that 
rushes forth from an opened grave (Matt. 15:18).  
 
(2)  Their tongues are deceptive, v. 13b. 
 
If  the  throat  is  the  vent  of  the  inner  human  region,  then  the  tongue  is  the 
exhaust  fan  that  thrusts  the  bad  breath  outward.  Here  man  is  described  as 
having spiritual halitosis! The imperfect here of doliÒw, dolioo¯ , stresses that 
man  continually  “keep[s]  deceiving.”  The  fan  never  seems  to  stop!  And 
what,  more  specifically,  does  man  have  to  say?  Certainly  gossip,  profanity, 
slander,  and  vulgarity  are  to  be  included.  But  surely  deeper  corruption  is 
regurgitated,  including  pride,  arrogance,  boasting,  ambition,  self-assertion, 
atheism, rationalism, scepticism, humanism, etc. 
 
                                            
91
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 2:1-3:20, p. 210. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  81
(3)  Their lips are poisonous, v. 13c. 
 
If the tongue thrusts forth man’s bad breath, it is the lips that attempt to give 
an  attractive  presentation  to  that  which  is  in  fact  a  hidden  deadly  poison. 
Quoting Psalm 140:3b, which also presupposes the “sharp tongue” of Psalm 
140:3a,  the  allusion  may  be  to  the  Egyptian  cobra  that  has  poison  bags 
beneath  its  lips.  So  as  man  speaks,  the  venom  is  hidden  behind  smiling, 
beguiling and appealing lips, that is until the unsuspecting victim draws close 
and  is  fatally  bitten.  “Poison”  here  is  ,  ios,  which  describes  that  which 
corrodes metals, and in James 3:8 refers to the toxic poison of the tongue. 
 
(4)  Their mouth curses, v. 14. 
 
Quoting Psalm 10:7, the fullness of the mouth is a result of the fullness of the 
soul; here the mouth of the wicked is the megaphone of the heart, and thus it 
broadcasts  with  vocal  and  public  hostility.  What  specifically  are  his 
grievances?  With  shades  of  the  rebellion  of  Psalm  2:1-3,  he  complains  of 
God’s existence and thus curses and mocks Him (Ps. 10:3-4, 11); he boasts in 
his  autonomy  (Ps.  10:5-6);  he  denigrates  the  virtuous,  the  unfortunate,  the 
afflicted, since they have not asserted themselves as he has (Ps. 10:8-10). But 
how opposite is to be the mouth of the child of God (Eph. 4:29; Col. 4:6). 
 
(5)  Their feet shed blood, v. 15. 
 
In vs. 15-17 we have selections from Isaiah 59:7-8. Here the feet, which to be 
precise, are more vehicles of the arms that shed blood; further, they also give 
mobility  to  the  mouth;  yet  all  of  these  bodily  features  are  but  the  unfailing 
servants of the  sinful  heart.  However,  the  rapidity  here  indicates  the  zeal  of 
the ungodly.  John MacArthur comments that, 
a baby born in the 1980's [in the U.S.] is more likely to be murdered than an 
American  soldier  in  World  War  II  was  of  being  killed  in  combat.  Whether  in 
peace  or  in  war,  man  kills  man.  The  mass  exterminations  of  the  Nazis  and 
Marxists  in  our  own  century  have  their  counterparts  in  past  history.  The 
notorious  Chang  Hsien-chung  in  seventeenth  century  China  killed  practically 
all of the people in Szechwan province. During that same century in Hungary, 
a  certain  countess  systematically  tortured  and  murdered  more  than  six 
hundred young girls.
92
    
 
(6)  Their paths are warlike, vs. 16-17. 
 
The picture here is a variety of paths before which man must choose. In The 
Pilgrim’s  Progress,  for  the  advancing  pilgrim  there  is the alternative  path  to 
the Village Morality that leads away from the path to the Wicket-gate; there 
is not only the straight and narrow way, but also the broad way; at the foot 
of  the  Hill  Difficulty,  where  the  straight  way  ascends  directly  ahead,  are 
optional paths, one leading to Danger and the other to Destruction; there is 
the alternative of the more comfortable path that leads to Doubting Castle.  
                                            
92
  MacArthur, Romans 1-8, p. 190. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  82 
(a)  They lead to conflict, v. 16. 
 
Job  5:4  correctly  describes  man  as,  “born  for  trouble,  as  sparks  fly 
upward.” James  4:1-2 explains  the  source  of  this  turmoil,  even though 
he  addresses  wayward  Christians:  “What  is  the  source  of  quarrels  and 
conflicts among you? Is not the source your pleasures that wage war in 
your members? You lust and do not have; so you commit murder. And 
you are envious and cannot obtain; so you fight and quarrel.”   
 
(b)  They don’t lead to peace, v. 17. 
 
It  seems  intimated  that  a  way  of  peace  is  available,  a  way  of  truth,
93
 
righteousness  and  justice  which  Isaiah  59:8b,  14-15  describes.  But,  as 
Haldane  comments,  “the  most  savage  animals  do  not  destroy  so  many 
of  their  own  species  to  appease  their  hunger,  as  man  destroys  of  his 
fellows; so satiate his ambition, his revenge, or cupidity [avarice].” 
 
(7)  Their eyes are void of the fear of God, v. 18.  
 
The  final  quotation  is  taken  from  Psalm  36:1  to  draw  our  attention  to  the 
distinctive  and  fundamental  role  of  the  “eye.”  This  verse  is  concluding  and 
climactic, cf. with v. 10. All of the other bodily members have an expressive 
function,  whereas  the  eye  receives  impressions  which  are  stored  in  the  mind 
to  which  the  soul  responds;  the  eye  is  a  receptor  rather  than  a  transmitter 
(Matt. 15:11). Furthermore, we have here the root cause of all of the various 
sinful manifestations that have just been considered. 
 
(a)  What  is  it  to  “fear  God”?  It  is  to  revere  and  rightly  acknowledge  His 
holy  being,  and  not  momentarily  but  continually  as  the  ground  of  a 
person’s  living  (Ps.  16:8a).  Such  perception  is  disturbing  to  the 
unbeliever and delightful, though undiminished, to the believer.  
 
(b)  What  is  it  here  to  “not  fear  God”?  In  context,  it  means  to  have  had 
some disturbing  confrontation  with  God,  cf.  1:19-21;  2:14-15,  and yet 
at  the  same  time,  rather  than  respond  with  appropriate  “terror,”
94
 
revolt against God himself in a most determined manner. Now this is an 
astonishing  attitude  since,  as  Haldane  explains:  “They  are  more  afraid 
of man than of God - of his anger, his contempt, or ridicule. The fear of 
man  prevents  them  from  doing  many  things  from  which  they  are  not 
restrained by the fear of God.”
95
  
 
(c)  Here  is  the  fundamental  solution  to  the  catalogue  of  particular  sins 
enumerated from 3:18 to this point since, “by the fear of the LORD one 
keeps  away  from  evil”  (Prov.  16:6;  cf.  Ps.  128:1).  If  a  person  has  now 
                                            
93
  Haldane, Romans, p. 128. 
94
  Morris, Epistle to the Romans, p. 169. 
95
  Ibid., p. 129. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  83
come  to  see  their  sinfulness  in  a  fuller  and  more  fearful  light,  then 
certainly  the  fear  of  the  Lord  has  begun  to  dawn  upon  us;  if  we  fear 
God on account of our sin, then let us press on with Paul as he leads us 
to that fear of God resulting from the remedy of His saving grace (Heb. 
12:28-29). 
 
3.  The universality of sin accentuated, vs. 19-20. 
 
In this summation of the consequences of the preceding indictment of the human race, 
one truth rises above every other issue. In v. 19, man is to be accountable “to God;” in 
v.  20,  man  is  considered  “in  His  [God’s]  sight.”  This  vertical  relationship  is  Paul’s 
supreme concern, and it remains the greatest issue for any person of any age, race, sex, 
or  social  status,  since  the  fall  of  Adam.  To  this  end  the  law  is  of  instrumental 
significance, yet we have to be careful in discovering what exactly Paul means by “the 
law” in these verses. 
 
a.  The law brings accountability before God v. 19. 
 
(1)  So  to  retranslate,  “Now  we  know  [cf.  2:2],”  or  “it  is  common  knowledge 
that whatever the law says, it speaks to those in [not “under”] the law.” 
 
(a)  In  view  of  the  preceding  context  where  only  Psalms  and  Isaiah  have 
been quoted, “law” here must refer to the whole of the Old Testament, 
and may even include that revelation given to the heart (2:15). Consider 
I  Corinthians  14:21  where  Paul  quotes  from  Isaiah  28:11-12  and 
designates this as “the law.” Hodge states,  
The  word  nÒmoj,  nomos,  means  that  which  binds  the  reason,  the 
conscience,  the  heart,  and  the  life,  whether  it  be  revealed  in  the 
constitution of our nature, or in the decalogue, or in the law of Moses, or 
in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  the  word  or  revelation  of  the  will  of  God, 
considered  as  the  norm  or  rule  to  which  men  are  to  conform  their  faith 
and practice.
96
  
“Law”  is  a  representation  to  man  of  God’s  unchanging  righteousness; 
the representation may change, but never the righteousness.  
 
(b)  Who are those “in the law”? While Paul has just quoted the Jewish law 
and the Jews remain the hardest to convict of their sin, the universality 
of the following “every mouth” and “all the world” must also guide us 
here. Surely if “all the world” is to become accountable, then Paul must 
have in mind the Jew first with inscripturated law, but also the Gentile 
with the law on his heart. Ultimately, both Jew and Gentile are “in the 
law,” in a relationship with the revealed righteousness of God.  
 
 
 
 
                                            
96
  Hodge, Romans, p. 80. Also note Murray, Romans, I, pp. 105-6. 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  84 
(2)  Thus the purpose of the law is revealed in a twofold sense. 
 
The  work  of  the  law  is  now  clearly  distinguished  from  that  of  the  gospel. 
Here the law of God is a merciless and relentless accuser that bludgeons the 
self-righteous to the ground. To attempt to rise up in proud protest is only to 
be rightly crushed. 
 
(a)  “That every mouth may be closed.” 
 
Here  is  a  courtroom  scene  in  which  the  accused  is  so  confronted  with 
the  evidence  of  his  crime,  its  enormity,  ugliness  and  wilfulness,  that  he 
knows  he  is  rightly  to  be  condemned.  Any  protestations  are  utter 
foolishness. The head drops, the blush is of shame, the bubble of pride 
has been  shattered  (Dan.  9:7).  This  has  been Paul’s  purpose  from 1:18 
onward.  Man  is  naturally  a  prolific  talker  and  boaster.  But  when  the 
presupposition  of  the  gospel,  the  bad  news,  is  rightly  preached  as  it 
ought  to  be,  it  so  confronts  man  that  his  mouth  becomes  closed  on 
account of undoubted guilt, like Job (Job 40:3-5; 42:1-6).  
 
(b)  “That all the world may become accountable to God.” 
 
The evidence is so compelling concerning man’s guilt that he is required 
to  answer.  But  what  can  he  say?  He  is  like  a  man  whose  crime  is 
recorded on video tape, and at his trial the recording is played before he 
and  the  judge.  So  in  Luke  12:2-3  we  are  told,  “But  there  is  nothing 
covered  up  that  will  not  be  revealed,  and  hidden  that  will  not  be 
known. Accordingly, whatever you have said in the dark shall be heard 
in  the  light,  and  what  you  have  whispered  in  the  inner  rooms  shall  be 
proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.”  Of  course  the  startling  truth  is  that 
God  will  have  all  men  to  come  to  this  state  of  condemnation  and 
speechlessness before His bar. 
 
b.  The law brings the knowledge of sin, v. 20. 
 
(1)  The law is not an instrument of justification. 
 
This  negative  reiteration  of  the  truth  of  v.  19  draws  attention  to  the  Jew’s 
perverted  use  of  the  law,  that  is  as  a  means of  maintaining  acceptance  with 
God  following  circumcision.  Paul’s  frequently  used  term  “the  works  of  the 
law” (cf. 3:28; Gal. 2:16; 3:2, 5, 10) focuses on the requirements of the law,
97
 
whether  moral,  civil,  or  ceremonial,
98
  and  the  misplaced  perception  that 
fulfillment  of  such  requirements,  produced  through  cooperation  with  grace, 
would maintain justification before God is wholly negated. Such justification 
was  ordained  through  faith  (9:31-32).  Such  justification,  or  right  standing 
                                            
97
  Moo comments, “‘Works of the law.’ then, as most interpreters have recognized, refers simply to ‘things that 
are done in obedience to the law,’” Epistle to the Romans, p. 209.  
98
  These  terms  are  mentioned  merely  as  a  concession  to some  popular  usage  even  though  Paul  makes  no  such 
distinctions. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  85
with  God,  can  only  come  through  justification  by  faith  in  Christ’s  atoning 
righteousness  (1:17;  3:21-26;  cf.  Ps.  143:2).  The  giving  of  the  law  followed 
Israel’s redemption out of Egypt. So “Why the law? It was added because of 
transgressions” (Gal. 3:19), that is to accentuate the reality of sin. 
 
(2)  The law is an instrument of sin diagnosis. 
 
In  other  words,  the  law  is  diagnostic  rather  than  remedial;  it  exposes  but  it 
cannot  heal;  it  accuses  but  it  cannot  pardon;  it  is  essentially  good  but 
functionally impotent. 
 
(a)  To “all flesh.”  
 
1)  All Jews, without exception. 
 
No  Jew  will  be  justified  by  the  law.  According  to  the  right  use  of 
this  inscripturated  law  revelation  of  the  Old  Testament  (2:17-24), 
all  Jews  are  not  only  under  the  scrutiny  of  God’s  law 
righteousness, but also proven to be thorough sinners. 
 
2)  All Gentiles, without exception. 
 
No Gentile will be justified by the law. According to the right use 
of  this  internal  law  revelation  to  the  heart  (2:15),  all  Gentiles  are 
not  only  under  God’s  law  righteousness  scrutiny,  but  also  proven 
to be thorough sinners.  
 
(b)  Illustrations. 
 
1)  The x-ray machine. 
 
An  x-ray  machine  is  an  excellent  diagnostic  means  of  revealing 
deep-rooted disease not previously known. But an x-ray machine is 
quite  useless  insofar  as  healing  the  problem  it  exposes  is 
concerned. 
 
2)  The scalpel. 
 
The  surgeon’s  knife  is  able  to  cut  below  the  surface,  usually  with 
resulting  pain,  so  as  to  expose  internal  corruption,  but  it  cannot 
attempt to heal by means of eliminating vital organs. 
 
3)  The magnifying glass. 
 
By  means  of  close  focus,  a  seeming  small  problem  is  shown  for 
what  it  really  is,  a  mortal  disease.  However,  the  magnifying  glass 
is quite incapable of healing that which it exposes. 
 
 
THE UNRIGHTEOUSNESS OF MAN – THE BAD NEWS  86 
(c)  The law is a revelation of God’s ethic (righteousness) without dynamic. 
 
The  law,  whether  revealed  to  the  Jew  or  Gentile,  is  a  summary  of  the 
righteousness  of  God,  but  it  is  incapable  of  producing  righteousness. 
You  can  plaster  the  Ten  Commandments  everywhere  in  a  nation,  but 
this will not in the slightest produce true heart righteousness. The law is 
a  summary  of  righteousness  without  any  power  to  produce 
righteousness.  However,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  is  perfection  of 
ethic  and  fulness  of  dynamic.  Therefore  the  answer  to  the  problem  of 
sin  in  the  Christian  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  not  Moses  (Rom.  7:1-4; 
8:1-4). 
 
(d)  The law accentuates the knowledge of sin. 
 
1)  Therefore, “through the law comes the knowledge of sin.” That is, 
through  the  revelation  of  the  holiness  and  righteousness  of  God 
comes  the  “knowledge”  ™p…gnwsij,  epigno¯ sis,  of  man’s  thorough 
sinfulness.  The  use  of  ™p…gnwsij,  epigno¯ sis,  here  is  appropriate 
since  its  compound  form  stresses  an  advance  in  the  knowledge  of 
sin,  a  greater  comprehension  of  personal  corruption.
99
  Without  a 
knowledge  of  this  truth,  the  gospel  of  justification  through  faith 
alone in the Lord Jesus Christ is meaningless. 
 
2)  Illustration. Lloyd-Jones comments:  
When  you  are  speaking  to  a  highly  moral,  good,  philanthropic 
person,  one  who  never  seems  to  have  done  any  harm  to  anybody, 
and  is  always  doing  good,  but  who  does  not  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus Christ, what you say to him is this, ‘Is there this fear of God 
before your eyes? How do you stand before God?’ You do not talk 
about  their  lives,  you  talk  about  their  status,  their  standing,  their 
position face to face with God in the judgment. And there they, like 
everybody  else,  are  guilty,  they  cannot  answer.  ‘All  have  sinned, 
and come short of the glory of God’, ‘all the world’ is guilty before 
God. And the first thing that the gospel of Christ does is enable us 
to escape from the wrath to come.
100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
99
  Cf. 1:28; 10:2; R. C. Trench, Synonyms of the New Testament, pp. 285-86; Hodge, Romans, p. 86. 
100
 Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 2:1-3:20, p. 227. 
CHAPTER V 
 
ROMANS 3:21-31 - THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, 
THE GOOD NEWS 
 
 
HAT which 1:17 introduced, 3:21-26 now fulfills, and especially with regard to the key term, 
“the righteousness of God.” Concerning what exactly is the Christian gospel, here is the locus 
classicus [most authoritative] passage in all of the Bible. Other passages such as John 3:14-16; I 
Corinthians 15:1-5; Ephesians 2:1-10 are highly significant, but Romans 3:21-26 is both the most 
compact  and  comprehensive  portion  of  Scripture  revealing  the  one  and  only  gospel  in  the 
canonical Scriptures. In the margin of the Luther Bible at Roman 3:23, the Reformer comments 
that  this  passage  is  “the  chief  point,  and  the  very  central  place  of  the  Epistle,  and  of  the  whole 
Bible.”
1
 Robert Mounce rightly declares,  
There is more theology compressed into these six verses than into any other comparable segment of 
Paul’s writing. Here we encounter the central thrust of the apostolic message. In these verses he lays 
the foundation of his theology. To understand what Paul is teaching in this section is to have a firm 
grasp on the essence of the Christian faith. Everything else flows from this theological center.
2
 
Consider  that  the  root  of  “righteousness,”  dikaiosÚnh,  dikaiosune¯ ,  occurs  seven  times  in  these 
verses via four nouns as “righteousness,” two verbs as “to justify,” and one adjective as “just.” 
Then  we  have  the  subjects  of  “law  (2),  faith  (4),  sin  (2),  the  glory  of  God,  grace,  redemption, 
propitiation by blood.” Now to some this may appear as weighty truth that is more the domain 
of scholars and theologians. To this, Lloyd-Jones rightly responds:  
‘Ah  but’,  you  say,  ‘that  will  not  appeal  to  people  today,  they  are  not  interested  in  theology.’  The 
answer  is  that  they  must  become  interested  in  theology  if  they  are  to  become  Christians;  they  must 
hear  the  truth  and  must  believe  it.  Men  have  never  been  interested  in  theology,  and  never  will  be, 
until the Holy Spirit deals with them. So our business is to preach the truth to them, trusting to the 
Holy  Spirit  to  open  their  eyes  and  their  understanding,  and  to  apply  it  to  them  with  power.  Here 
then, I say, is one of these crucial passages which indeed governs the whole of our preaching. It must 
always be within the bounds of this tremendous statement which we have here.
3
 
In terms of contemporary evangelism, and present definitions of the gospel, it is here that we find 
the standard for the message proclaimed. Unfortunately, what we are about to study is not that 
gospel  commonly  proclaimed  since  substance  has  given  way  to  sentiment,  truth  has  yielded  to 
methodology, doctrine has been supplanted by cultural relevance, and true saving faith has been 
replaced  by  decisionism.  One  has  only  to  read  gospel  messages  proclaimed  by  Luther,  Calvin, 
Bunyan,  Whitefield,  Wesley,  Edwards,  Spurgeon,  and  Lloyd-Jones,  to  readily  discern  in  general 
today  not  simply  a  different  style  that  suits  this  twentieth  century,  but  a  divergence  from  that 
distinctive Pauline gospel which Romans so epitomizes.  
                                                
1
  Douglas J. Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 218. 
2
  Robert H. Mounce, Themes From Romans, pp. 36-37. Leon Morris writes that this passage, “is possibly the 
most important single paragraph ever written, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 173. C. E . B. Cranfield likewise 
comments, “This short section . . . is the center and heart of the whole of Romans 1:16b-15:13,” A Critical 
And Exegetical Commentary On The Epistle To The Romans, I, p. 199.   
3
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 3:20-4:25, pp. 31-32. 
T 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
88
Neil  Postman,  certainly  not  a  confessing  conservative  evangelical,  has  yet  provided  a  most 
revealing  analysis  of  twentieth  century  communication  as  it  contrasts  with  past  generations.  He 
concludes:  
No clearer example of the difference between earlier forms of public discourse can be found than in 
the contrast between the theological arguments of Jonathan Edwards and those of, say, Jerry Falwell, 
or  Billy  Graham,  or  Oral  Roberts.  The  formidable  content  of  Edwards’  theology  must  inevitably 
engage the intellect; if there is such a content to the theology of the television evangelists, they have 
not yet made it known.
4
 
Perhaps  the  response  might  be  made  that  while  Edwards’  had  a  brilliant  mind,  yet  his  writings 
are too ponderous and hardly represent the sort of ministry that would be effective at a practical 
evangelistic level today.  
The  simple  answer  to  this  misunderstanding  is  to  quote  from  Edwards  himself  concerning  the 
commencement  of  revival  in  Northampton,  Massachusetts,  with  regard  to  the  effects  of  his 
preaching on Justification By Faith Alone based upon the text, Romans 4:5. He writes: 
The following discourse of justification, that was preached (though not so fully as it is here printed) 
at two public lectures, seemed to be remarkably blessed, not only to establish the judgment of many 
in this truth, but to engage their hearts in a more earnest pursuit of justification, in that way that had 
been  explained  and  defended;  and  at  that  time,  while  I  was  greatly  reproached  for  defending  this 
doctrine in the pulpit, and just upon my suffering a very open abuse for it, God’s work wonderfully 
brake  forth  amongst  us,  and  souls  began  to  flock  to  Christ,  as  the  Savior  in  whose  righteousness 
alone  they  hoped  to  be  justified.  So  that  this  was  the  doctrine  on  which  this  work  in  its  beginning 
was founded, as it evidently was in the whole progress of it.
5
 
 
 
A.  THIS RIGHTEOUSNESS IS APART FROM THE LAW, 3:21-24 
 
As others have acknowledged, there seems to be a division of expressed thought between vs. 
21-24  and  vs.  25-26.
6
  In  vs.  21-24  there  is  reference  to  the  fact  of  righteousness  through 
faith alone in Christ alone, that is the fact and availability of free grace. However, in vs. 25-
26 there is described how this free grace has been divinely made available. 
 
1.  It is righteousness through faith, vs. 21-22b. 
 
It would help if the notes on 1:17a concerning “GOD’S GOSPEL IS RIGHTEOUS” on 
pages 27-30 were reviewed.  
 
a.  It is “now” as opposed to the past, v. 21a. 
 
(1)  “But now,” introduces a gloriously contrasting revelation of hope in the face 
of near despair. Here we are transported from death to life, darkness to light, 
condemnation  to  justification,  works  righteousness  to  faith  righteousness, 
hell to heaven. We move from the Old Testament administration of shadows, 
types  and  promise  to  the  New  Testament  administration  of  substance, 
antitypes, and fulfillment. 
                                                
4
  Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves To Death, p. 56. 
5
  Jonathan Edwards, The Works of Jonathan Edwards, I, p. 620. 
6
  Refer to Boice and Lloyd-Jones. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
89
(2)  Here “But now,” Nunˆ dš, Nuni de, is a great transitionary expression. Nun…, 
Nuni,  is  an  adverb  of  time  that  introduces  what  God  has  “now,”  in  “the 
now  time,”  v.  26,  done  in  contrast  with  what  has  transpired  in  the  past,  v. 
25.  Nun…,  Nuni,  is  also  emphatic,
7
  so  that  Lloyd-Jones’  exuberant  whole 
sermon based on this expression is quite justified. He writes,  
‘But  now.’  There  are  no  more  wonderful  words  in  the  whole  of  the  Scripture 
than just these two words. . . . We are all of us under condemnation, we are all 
under the wrath of God. We can never produce a righteousness that can stand 
up  to  God’s  searching  glance  and  examination  and  investigation.  We  are 
altogether  hopeless.  Are  you  clear  about  that?  If  you  are,  you  are  ready  to 
rejoice in these two words, ‘But now.’
8
 
 
(3)  Note how “But now,” Nunˆ dš, Nuni de,  is similarly used in Ephesians 2:12-
13;  Colossians  1:21-22;  3:6-8  with  regard  to  the  glorious  contrast  of  the 
gospel. So William Matson has suitably penned: 
 
 Lord, I was blind, I could not see 
   In Thy marred visage any grace; 
 But now the beauty of Thy face 
   In radiant vision dawns on me. 
 Lord, I was deaf, I could not hear 
   The thrilling music of Thy voice; 
 But now I hear Thee and rejoice, 
   And mighty are Thy words, and dear. 
 Lord, I was dumb, I could not speak 
   The grace and glory of Thy name; 
 But now, as touched with living flame, 
   My lips Thine eager praises wake. 
 Lord, I was dead, I could not stir 
   My lifeless soul to come to Thee; 
 But now, since Thou hast quickened me, 
   I rise from sin’s dark sepulcher. 
For Thou has made the blind to see, 
   The deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, 
The dead to live; and lo, I break 
   The chains of my captivity. 
b.  It is “apart from [the] law,” v. 21b. 
 
  The  emphatic  position  of  this  phrase,  in  relation  to  the  prior  teaching  on  “law” 
and  the  prospective  emphasis  on  “[the]  righteousness  of  God”  cannot  be  over 
emphasized. 
 
(1)  More  accurately  the  translation  should  read,  “apart  from  law,”  with  no 
definite  article,  the  inference  being  that  “law”  of  whatever  category  is 
                                                
7
  W. F. Arndt and F. W. Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon Of The New Testament, p. 548. 
8
  Lloyd-Jones, Roman, 3:20:4:25, pp. 25, 28. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
90
eliminated.  In  the  past  economy  of  the  Jew  and  Gentile,  there  was  a  “law” 
manifestation  of  “the  righteousness”  of  God,”  even  “wrath,”  1:18.  But 
“now”  has  come  a  manifestation  of  “the  righteousness  of  God”  which,  via 
Jesus Christ, is “the righteousness of faith,” cf. vs. 22; 4:11; 10:6.
9
 
 
(2)  However, in view of v. 20 where the purpose of the law is closely defined, so 
here this “righteousness of God” excludes that wrong use of the law where it 
is supposed to be a stimulus to righteousness.
10
 Any attempt on man’s part to 
be  justified  by  law  righteousness  requires  the  keeping  of  the  law  totally, 
perfectly, and eternally (Gal. 5:3). 
 
c.  It is “[the] righteousness of God,” v. 21c. 
 
This is Paul’s key term in Romans, and while it has been introduced in 1:17 as a 
synonym for the gospel, and in 3:5 it is differently used to describe God’s essential 
moral  being  and  its  demands  upon  mankind,
11
  here  the  full  gospel  force  is 
expounded. 
 
(1)  The gospel is fundamentally a moral issue. 
 
In  our  contemporary  evangelical  climate,  it  might  be  asked  as  to  why  Paul 
writes  of  “righteousness”  here  rather  than  “love.”  The  answer  is  that  while 
“love” speaks today of a relationship of acceptance and congeniality that is 
morally  unanchored,  the  Bible  declares  man’s  fundamental  problem  to  be 
moral;  that  is  man  is  unrighteous  before  a  wholly  righteous  God.  The 
alienation  of  man  from  God  is  a  result  of  sin  (Isa.  59:2),  so  that  the  moral 
conflict must be dealt with for love to be expressed. As Warfield states, “The 
love  of  God  is  in  its  exercise  necessarily  under  the  control  of  his 
righteousness.”
12
  Indeed,  the  great  problem  for  God,  as  man  might  perceive 
it, is how He can justly deal with sin and at the same time justify the sinner. 
We have already seen with regard to 1:17 that Isaiah, in many passages such 
as 46:12-13; 61:10, speaks of God saving in righteousness that is at the same 
time pardoning and gracious. So the same thought is now expressed.  
 
(2)  The gospel is “[the] righteousness of God.” 
 
(a)  This  phrase  can  be  understood  from  four  perspectives.  (1)  God  is 
essentially righteous. (2) God demands righteousness. (3) God saves in a 
righteous  manner.  (4)  God  provides  an  imputed/declarative  gift  of 
righteousness.  Clearly,  points  1  and  2  cannot  apply  here  since  God’s 
essential  and  demanding  righteousness  can  only  condemn  unrighteous 
humankind and result in guilt and despair whereas the context here is of 
good  news.  Rather,  the  thought  is  akin  to  that  which  Isaiah  writes 
about, as mentioned earlier. While point 3 is described in v. 26, yet the 
                                                
9
  Moo, Romans, pp. 222-3. 
10
  John Murray, The Epistle To The Romans, I, pp. 109-10. 
11
  As Moo, having considered several alternative views, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 189-90. 
12
  Benjamin B. Warfield, The Plan of Salvation, p. 74. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
91
immediately  following  prominence  of  faith  in  vs.  22,  26  must  call  for 
the  prime  meaning  being  “reckoned  righteousness,”  4:5,      “the  gift  of 
righteousness,”  5:17,  that  is,  “not  .  .  .  a  righteousness  of  my  own 
derived  from  the  Law,  but  that  which  is  through  faith  in  Christ,  the 
righteousness which comes from God on the basis of faith” (Phil. 3:9). 
Therefore this is an alien, perfect, objective righteousness that is sourced 
in the wholly righteous Jesus Christ. 
 
(b)  John  Bunyan  comments:  “Now,  this  righteousness  of  God,  whatever  it 
is, to be sure it is not a righteousness that flows from men; for that, as I 
said,  is  rejected,  and  the  righteousness  of  God  opposed  unto  it,  being 
called  a  righteousness  that  is  without  the  law,  without  our  personal 
obedience  to  it.  The  righteousness  of  God, or  a  righteousness of  God’s 
completing,  a  righteousness  of  God’s  bestowing,  a  righteousness  that 
God also gives unto, and puts upon all them that believe (Rom. 3:22), a 
righteousness  that  stands  in  the  works  of  Christ,  and  that  is  imputed 
only by the grace and justice of God (Rom. 3:24-26).
13
 
 
(3)  The gospel is soul liberating, gratis righteousness from God. 
 
 Herein lies the glory of the saving grace of God, the emancipating news that 
transforms  Martin  Luther  and  a  great  and  growing  host  of  sinners.  Imagine 
the  sheer  ecstasy  that  would  erupt  from  the  tax-gatherer  of  Luke  18:9-14  if 
he, having through faith declared, “God, be merciful to me, the sinner,” then 
heard  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  declare,  “this  man  went  down  to  his  house 
justified.” 
 
d.  It is manifested, v. 21d. 
 
The  perfect  tense  in  the  translation  “has  been  manifested  [clearly  revealed]” 
rightly calls attention to a prior “law” manifestation of God’s righteousness that 
“now” comes in a far more glorious manner (II Cor. 3:7-11). God has, according 
to  His  determined  timing  (Gal.  4:4),  actively  made  known  the  gospel  in  its 
glorious unclouded fulness, for promise has given way to fulfilment (Heb. 1:1-3).   
 
e.  It is witnessed, v. 21e. 
 
This testimony “is being witnessed [present tense] by the law and the prophets.” 
Hence,  the  emphasis  here  is  upon  the  “now”  witness  in  the  Word  of  God 
concerning  this  new  revelation  of  God’s  justifying  righteousness.  This  term,  “the 
Law  and  the  Prophets”  refers  to  the  united  testimony  of  the  whole  of  the  Old 
Testament, including “the writings” which Paul has already freely quoted (Matt. 
5:17; 22:40; Luke 24:27, 44). 
 
(1)  In the Old Testament the gospel continues to be witnessed to, specifically in 
Habakkuk  2:4;  cf.  Romans  1:17;  Galatians  3:11;  Hebrews  10:38,  and  also 
                                                
13
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, I, 309. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
92
with  regard  to  Abraham  and  David  in  Rom.  4:1-8.  Then  consider  Genesis 
3:15, Psalm 22, Isaiah52-53, and Daniel 9:24-26.   
 
(2)  Thus  Paul  is  teaching  us  the  importance  of  the  Old  Testament  since  it 
contains the one and only gospel of the grace of God. Hence the gospel that 
Paul proclaimed was not new, but rather that which had been abiding since 
the Fall. Paul has no thought of a new grace salvation revealed in his epistles 
that has superceded a law salvation revealed in the Old Testament.  
 
f.  It is “through faith in Jesus Christ,” v. 22a. 
 
Paul  repeats  his  gospel  phrase  “[the]  righteousness  of  God,”  and  it  gives  clear 
proof for believing that “the righteousness of God” mentioned in v. 21 is “the gift 
of righteousness,” 5:17, that is an objective righteousness. 
 
(1)  What  is  the  right  translation?  The  grammar  here  allows  two  legitimate 
variants.  The  objective  genitive,  as  in  the  KJV,  NKJV,  NIV,  ESV,  translates 
“faith in Jesus Christ,” and for many reasons is to be preferred, with parallel 
support  from  Galatians  2:16.
14
  The  subjective  genitive  translates 
“faith[fulness] of Jesus Christ.” 
 
(2)  What  is  the  role  of  faith?  The  gospel  comes  “through  faith”  and  not  “by 
faith.”  That  is,  faith  is  a  mediate  channel  of  salvation,  not  an  instrumental 
cause  of  salvation;  faith  is  linkage,  a  coupling;  faith  is  works  and  self 
renouncing trust.  
 
(a)  J. Gresham Machen writes: “Faith is not a meritorious work; the New 
Testament never says that a man is saved on account of his faith. Faith 
is the means which the Holy Spirit uses to apply to the individual soul 
the benefits of Christ’s death. And faith is a very simple thing; it simply 
means the receiving of a gift.”
15
 
 
(b)  True  saving  faith  involves  a  sinner,  using  intellect,  will,  and  emotions, 
who  first  encounters  gospel  truth,  then  acknowledges  this  gospel  truth 
to  be  true  in  general  and  in  particular  regarding  himself,  and  then 
personally embraces this gospel truth, as is described in 6:17.  
 
(c)  By way of illustration, imagine that you have a problem slipping over in 
the bath. A friend suggests that you need a handle to hang on to, so you 
go to a hardware store and buy one. But consider how stupid it would 
be  for  you  to  then  sit  in  the  bath  holding  on  to  the  new  handle  even 
though it was not attached to anything! Faith is not to be objectified; it  
 
                                                
14
   Murray,  Romans,  I,  pp.  110-11,  363-372;  Moo,  Romans,  pp.  224-26,  especially  his  comment:  “Most 
damaging  to  the  hypothesis  in  either  form  [faithfulness  of  Christ,  or  faith  exercised  by  Jesus  Christ],  is  the 
consistent  use  of  p…stij,  pistis  throughout  3:21-4:25  to  designate  the  faith  exercised  by  people  in  God,  or 
Christ, as the sole means of justification,” p. 225. 
15
   J. Gresham Machen, God Transcendent, p. 91. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
93
is  not  therapeutic  in  itself;  faith  must  have  an  object,  and  it  is  the 
character of that object that makes salvation viable or non-viable. 
 
(3)  What  is  objective  justification?  It  contrasts  with  a  subjective  or  internal, 
infused  and  progressive  righteousness,  produced  in  cooperation  with  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  is  the  ground  of  justification  at  the  judgment 
day; it is essential Roman Catholic doctrine.  Rather, objective justification is 
the guilty sinner, aware of his thorough corruption, looking away from and 
outside  of  himself  toward  the  completed,  atoning  work  of  Jesus  (Heb.  1:3; 
10:11-14).  This  look  is  faith  in  the  invitation  and  promise  of  the  Savior 
Himself,  that  “he  who  hears  My word,  and  believes  Him  who  sent  me,  has 
eternal  life,  and  does  not  come  into  judgment,  but  has  passed  out  of  death 
into  life”  (John  5:24).  It  is  immediate  justification.  As  Paul  repeats  in  3:26, 
and  4:5,  “But  to  the  one  who  does  not  work,  but  believes  in  Him  who 
justifies the ungodly, his faith is reckoned as righteousness.” 
 
g.  It is “for all those who believe,” v. 22b. 
 
This  is  not  a  tautology  concerning  “faith  in  Jesus  Christ”  just  mentioned.  There 
the  emphasis  is  about  saving  union  with  Jesus  Christ,  that  is  through  faith;  here 
the emphasis concerns who may enter into this saving union, which is “all.” The 
“all” encompasses all Jews and Gentiles in a most inclusive and absolute and non-
distinguishing  sense.  But  the  “all”  must  be  “those  believing”  (present  tense), 
whose justification will continue to be solely mediated through faith. The implicit 
invitation here is universal, notwithstanding the doctrine of particular election. 
 
2.  It is righteousness for the unrighteous, vs. 22c-23. 
 
 Logical  connection  is  strong  here.  Why  is  the  gospel  offered  to  “all”  who  believe, 
without distinction? It is because “all” of mankind are sinful without distinction. 
 
a.  Sinners in sinful symphony, v. 22c. 
 
(1)  “For there is no difference” means that there is no distinction between men 
as sinners. From God’s perspective, we are all related to Adam, hence we are 
sinners  by  nature  and  consequent  choice.  Our  sins  are  a  result  of  our  sin 
nature just as a skin eruption will often be caused by a blood infection. 
 
(2)  Illustration. Jews and Gentiles are sinners, as are street bums and statesmen, 
paupers  and  presidents,  murderers  and  mothers,  prostitutes  and  ‘nice 
people.’ “But the Scripture declares that the whole world is a prisoner of son’ 
(Gal. 3:22 NIV), cf. 3:9. 
 
(3)  The word “distinction” or “difference” here, diastol», diastole¯, is used in I 
Corinthians 14:7 of a musical instrument normally producing “distinction in 
.  .  .  tones,”  while  yet  being  a  singular  instrument.    This  well  illustrates  that 
while sin may have variety, yet is remains a singular, universal kind. We are 
all  of  the  same  moral  kind,  even  if  there  is  variety  in  our  sinning.  In  other 
words,  the world  of  mankind  is  like  the  variety  of  instrumentalists within  a 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
94
symphony  orchestra.  They  play  different  sounds,  yet  there  is  no  ultimate 
distinction  since  they  are  playing  the  same  music  under  one  conductor.  So 
mankind  sins  with  variety  while  yet  playing  Satan’s  music  under  his 
conductorship.  Some  sin  like  the  base  drum,  loud  and  strong;  some  sin  like 
the  flute,  discreetly  with  culture,  some  prefer  sin  in  chorus  like  the  violins, 
some sin in a bold and brassy manner like the trumpets, some sin under the 
guise  of  religion  like  the  harp,  some  sin  and  make  a  performance  like  a 
celebrity pianist. But remember, all are sinners in sinful symphony, ‘for there 
is no distinction.”  
 
(4)  Application. Some people sin with sophistication, charm, finesse, which is so 
often  the  case  with  learned,  wealthy  and  religious  people.  Other  people  sin 
crudely, without polish, in an ugly manner; often they make headlines in the 
media. Some people sin overtly, with great display and exhibition, using the 
body.  Others  sin  covertly,  with  most  subtle  disguise  and  secrecy  using  the 
confines of the mind. Nevertheless, ‘the whole world is lying (present tense) 
in  wickedness’  (I  John  5:19).  As  a  race,  we  are  common  sinners,  even  if  in 
our sinning we are uncommon in the way we sin.  
 
b.  Sinners in sinful shortfall, v.  23. 
 
Thus here he have God’s perspective of the human race, being unlike that of man 
who  loves  to  make  distinctions  and  excuses!  Romans  3:23  is  one  of  the  most 
commonly  used  texts  in  modern  day  evangelism  insofar  as  bringing  men  to  a 
knowledge  of  their  sinfulness  is  concerned.  On  most  occasions  it  is  only  vaguely 
used  in  context  because  it  is  so  isolated  and  deprived  of  its  intended  content. 
Several  years  ago  I  responded  to  a  telephone  number  in  a  newspaper 
advertisement that offered to declare the “good news.” In two minutes and fifteen 
seconds the “gospel” was presented, including the quotation of this verse, as well 
as  a  concluding  invitation  to  “receive”  Jesus  Christ.  Such  is  the  banal 
communication  of  God’s  truth  today.  However,  this  passage  presupposes  some 
knowledge of the Old Testament, especially the fall of Genesis 3 as well as some 
recall of what Paul has taught thus far concerning sin in its breadth and depth. 
 
(1)  The root of man’s sinfulness is his corporate identification with Adam’s sin, 
for “all have sinned,” v. 23a. 
 
(a)  A more precise translation here reads, “For all sinned,” emphasizing the 
aorist  tense,  which  lumps  together  all  of  mankind  into  a  single  class. 
Furthermore,  in  contrast  with  the  present  tense  of,  “and  are  falling 
short of the glory of God,” there is strong inference here that man as a 
corporate  race  is  perceived  as  having  sinned  from  the  beginning  with 
Adam (cf. 5:12 where “sin” is used in the same aoristic manner).
16
 
 
(b)  What  is  sin?  Here  ¡mart£nw,  hamartano¯ ,  means  to  miss  the  mark, 
coming short of reaching a defined goal, which up to this point has been 
                                                
16
  Lloyd-Jones  and  Shedd  emphasize  Adam  here,  while  Moo  and  Murray,  though  not  denying  this  aspect,  yet 
stress man’s corporate identification with sin. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
95
attaining  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  now  is  described  as  “the 
glory  of  God.”  Of  course  such  “missing”  here  is  not  slight,  as  if  an 
archer just missed a bull’s-eye, but by a vast degree that is way off the 
mark. Man is not slightly in debt, but totally bankrupt. 
 
(c)  By  way  of  application,  what  does  this  mean  for  us  in  this  twentieth 
century?  When  I  travel  the  world  or  my  neighborhood  and  observe 
man,  and  am  confronted  with  his  futile  and  pagan  ways,  though  often 
accompanied  with  a  civil  secularity,  I  am  not  surprised  or  confounded 
for I understand man’s basic problem, his universal disease. Therefore I 
repudiate  evolutionary  thought  because  it  does  not  answer  to  the 
problem  of  continuing  evil  on  a  universal  scale,  though  Scripture 
emphatically does. I repudiate materialism and relativism which in such 
a shallow way sees man as merely environmentally and socially in need 
of adjustment. I understand that man’s problem is my problem, because 
of  what  I  know  about  myself  in  the  depths.  Hence,  the  problem  is 
radical and only thorough a radical solution of redemption in the heart 
by means of the Son of God will a man be saved  (II Cor. 5:17). 
 
(2)  The result of man’s sinfulness is continuous shortfall, for all “come short,” v. 
23b. 
 
(a)  The  verb  Østeršw,  hustere ¯ o,  means  “to  lack,  to  come  short,”  and  it  is 
used  in  Luke  15:14  to  describe  the  Prodigal  Son  who  “began  to  be  in 
need.” In Philippians 4:12 it describes Paul “suffering need” in contrast 
with “having abundance.” 
 
(b)  The  continuous  present  tense  here  indicates  that  man  sins  on  a  day  by 
day basis and not merely occasionally. His sinning is an inevitable result 
of sin as a principle. Because he is a child of Adam, he will sin, though 
he  does  so  agreeably.  Man  can  only  walk  along  a  straight  line  in  a 
crooked manner; he staggers on and on as if intoxicated, and that being 
under the influence of sin. 
 
(3)  The reflection of man’s sinfulness is “the glory of God,” v. 23c. 
 
 While  it  is  possible  to  consider  this  “glory”  to  be  God’s  essential  holy 
magnificence and outshining, before which man stands condemned,
17
 yet the 
more likely meaning is that this “glory” is that which God designed for man, 
man repudiated, and Jesus Christ regains. Of course the original plan was for 
man to reflect God’s essential glory. Again, man is like the Prodigal Son who, 
in departing from his Father’s home, also degenerates in terms of the glory he 
originally  possessed.  The  imago  Dei  has  been  severely  marred,  the  original 
portrait has been grossly disfigured.
18
  
 
                                                
17
  Robert Haldane, writes of “coming short of obeying the law,” Commentary on Romans, p. 151. 
18
  Murray lists four possibilities and cautiously opts for, “to come short of reflecting the glory of God, that is, of 
conformity to his image.” The Epistle To The Romans, I, pp. 112-3.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
96
(a)  Clearly,  what  Paul  describes  that  man  has  lost,  Jesus  Christ  restores, 
first  in  an  initial  sense  as  a  result  of  conversion  (II  Cor.  3:18;  4:6;  cf. 
John  17:22),  but  then  consummately  at  the  end  of  this  age  when  Jesus 
Christ returns (Rom. 5:2; 8:18, 29-30; Phil. 3:21). This emphasis upon 
what  redeemed  man  gains  surely  suggests  what  sinful  man  here  is 
described as having lost.  
 
(b)  Martyn Lloyd-Jones eloquently states: “Never has  the Apostle exposed 
the ravages of sin and the Fall in a more wonderful manner than in this 
twenty-third verse of the third chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Sin 
not only makes a man unrighteous, it robs him of the glory of God. And 
if you understand that, you will realize how futile it is ever to think that 
you, by your works or activities, can ever be fit to stand in the presence 
of  God.  Before  we  can  truly  know  Him,  and  have  communion  with 
Him,  let  alone  stand  before  the  glory  of  His  presence,  we  must  have 
something  of  His  glory.  .  .  .  But  without  it  we  can  never  see  God  and 
never  stand  in  His  presence.  But  the  Christian,  as  the  Apostle  Peter 
reminds us in the first chapter of his Second Epistle, is ‘made a partaker 
of the Divine nature’. Is that true of me as a Christian? It is! . . . There is 
a  new  man  in  me,  as  a  Christian,  that  is  glorious,  and  he  will  go  on 
‘being changed from glory to glory’.”
19
  
 
(4)  By  way  of  illustration,  this  whole  verse  may  be  likened  to  a  rocket 
programmed to head toward a certain planet that, having just been launched, 
suddenly  has  a  computer  malfunction  and  veers  off  course  in  the  opposite 
direction. It might be said that the rocket initially had “a program freeze” or 
“blew a fuse” (sinned) and as a consequence “it continued to come short of 
its  design”  (destiny,  glory).  So  man,  having  been  created  malfunctions  and 
veers  off  course  away  from  his  appointed  destination.  Like  the  rocket 
continuously  plummeting  into  alien  outer  space,  so  man  is  continuously 
plunging away from his intended course; his every step takes him away from 
the intended “glory of God.” 
 
3.  It is righteousness that is gratis, v. 24.  
 
While Romans 3:21-26 presents the most concise and yet comprehensive declaration of 
the gospel in all of Scripture, yet in v. 24 we come to the most important verse in this 
passage, indeed one of the most important passages in the whole Bible in which we are 
told  how  God  saves  sinners.  The  overall  thrust  here  is  an  expansion  of  the  thought 
that,  according  to  vs.  22-23,  reconciliation  with  God  for  thorough  sinners  is  wholly, 
exclusively,  gratuitously,  a  work  of  God  through  Christ,  appropriated  through  faith 
alone. 
 
a.  By way of illustration, imagine a man, having been justly imprisoned for a serious 
crime,  the  penalty  for  which  he  cannot  pay,  being  confronted  by  a  lawyer  who 
hands to the prisoner a signed release from the state governor to which is attached 
a receipt for payment of the penalty by the lawyer. Furthermore, the lawyer tells 
                                                
19
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 3:20-4:25, pp. 52-53. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
97
the  pardoned  man  to  go  and  live  at  his  residence,  which  the  son  learns  is  in  fact 
the residence of the governor, for the lawyer is his son! Does this seem incredible, 
unheard  of?  Yes,  it  may  seem  so.  But  read  Romans  5:6-8,  and  consider  three 
aspects of v. 24 here.  
 
(1)  As  a  sinner  with  that  pardon  kept  close  to  his  bosom  while  living  in  the 
governor’s  residence,  that  man  knows  that  he  is  declared  to  be  fully 
pardoned  while  at  the  same  time  being  a  privileged,  honored  person,  living 
with the rank of a son - he is justified. 
 
(2)  As  he  ponders  his  new  standing,  he  asks  himself  why  the  governor  was  so 
motivated  to  do  such  a  thing.  After  all,  he  was  certainly  guilty,  the  penalty 
was  great.  Yet  such  kindness  was  overwhelming  at  immense  personal  cost. 
This he concludes is pure grace.  
 
(3)  Then he wonders how his new standing came about. The governor could not 
declare  him  pardoned  for  no  reason  at  all,  according  to  mere  whim.  That 
would  be  irresponsibility.  Instead  he  sent  his  son  to  pay  the  price  for  his 
release - that is redemption. 
 
b.  Free justification. 
 
Paul  has  already  used  this  verb,  dikaiÒw,  dikaioo¯ ,  in  2:13;  3:4,  20  where  in  all 
instances a judicial declaration is intended, and this same basic meaning is at the 
root of the subsequent usage in 3:26, 28, 30; 4:2, 5; 5:1, 9; 6:7; 8:30, 33.  
 
(1)  Justification defined. 
 
  The  fundamental  meaning  of  Paul  here  is  that  of  a  legal,  forensic 
proclamation,  to  “be  acquitted,  be  pronounced  and  treated  as  righteous.”
20
 
We  might  liken  it  to  the  declaration  of  a  judge  who  brings  down  his  gavel 
with the verdict, “I find the defendant to be not guilty!” Such a statement is 
bound to stimulate a response of joy in the prisoner in the dock.     
 
(2)  Biblical illustrations. 
 
(a)  Luke 7:28-29. The people “justified God,” that is they declared God to 
be vindicated through the ministry of John the Baptist. 
 
(b)  Luke  10:25-29.  The  lawyer  “justified  himself,”  that  is  he  attempted  to 
declare himself or appear righteous, although this was not the case.. 
 
(c)  Luke 16:14-15. The Pharisees have a self-declared righteousness, but 
it is quite remote from actual personal righteousness. 
 
                                                
20
  Arndt and Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, p. 196. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
98
(e)  Luke  18:9-14.  While  the  Pharisee  boasted  in  a  phoney  personal 
righteousness,  the  repentant  tax-gatherer  received  the  declarative 
justification of Christ.  
 
(3)  Justification that is free. 
 
(e)  It is free by definition. 
 
Salvation is “free,” dwre£n, do¯ rean, unmerited, unprompted, unsought. 
Compare  John  15:25  where  this  same  word  is  used;  they  hated  Christ 
“without a cause,” that is “freely,” that is without any reason found in 
Christ  himself.  Likewise,  there  was  no  reason  within  the  sinner  why 
God  should  justify  him.  Such  a  reason  resides  alone  within  God’s 
gracious heart. Salvation is an individual Divine donation and grant.  
The  thought  here  is  not  to  be  likened  to  a  free  sample,  which  in 
commercial  terms  often  includes  subtle  tones  of  obligation.  Rather  the 
meaning  is  free  blessing  to  those  deserving  of  cursing,  a  full  and  free 
payment  that  cancels  a  crushing  debt,  liberty  without  price  to  the 
incarcerated, free entry for the disqualified entrant. 
 
(f)  It is free to man, but costly to God.   
 
Many children have, later in life, freely received a rich inheritance from 
their  parents,  without  cost  to  themselves.  However,  this  same 
inheritance cost their parents much sacrifice and effort. So the believing 
sinner’s  justification,  although  free,  has  yet  been  at  great  cost  to  the 
God who gratuitously justifies, even the death of His Son, 8:32.  
 
(g)  It is free in God. 
 
John  Murray  makes  the  point  well:  “No  element  in  Paul’s  doctrine  of 
justification  is  more  central  than  this  -  God’s  justifying  act  is  not 
constrained to any extent or degree by anything that we are or do which 
could be esteemed as predisposing God to this act. And not only is it the 
case that nothing in us or by us constrains to this act but all that is ours 
compels  the  opposite  judgment  -  the  whole  world  is  brought  in  guilty 
before  God  (cf.  vs.  9,  19).  This  action  on  God’s  part  derives  its  whole 
motivation,  explanation,  and  determination  from  what  God  himself  is 
and does in the exercise of free and sovereign grace. Merit of any kind 
on  the  part  of  man,  when  brought  into  relation  to  justification, 
contradicts  the  first  article  of  the  Pauline  doctrine  and  therefore  of  his 
gospel.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  that  it  is  one  of  free 
grace.”
21
 
 
 
 
                                                
21
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 115. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
99
(4)  Roman Catholic justification. 
 
  The  necessity  to  contrast  biblical  justification  with  that  which  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  teaches  is  bound  up  with  several  vital  matters.  First,  is  the 
fact that we are not considering a slight difference of opinion, but rather an 
issue  that  takes  us  to  the  heart  of  the  biblical  gospel.  Second  is  the  historic 
significance  of  this  matter  since  the  Protestant  Reformation  was  grounded 
upon  the  substance  of  the  gospel,  and  the  two  divergent  views  have  not 
changed in the slightest. Third is the matter of the Roman Catholic system of 
doctrine. The Roman view of justification is integral to a false gospel system. 
 
(e)  The Roman Catholic gospel. 
 
To  become  a  Christian,  after  instruction,  belief,  and  agreement,  the 
candidate  is  baptized by  means  of water.  In  this  act,  ex  opere operato, 
the rite ensuring the result, the person is instrumentally regenerated and 
becomes  born  again,  freed  from  all  stain  of  sin,  and  saved.
22
  A  person 
may  lose  this  salvation  by  committing  a  mortal  as  opposed  to  a  venial 
sin,  even  a  free-will  repudiation  of  the  faith.  Maintenance  of  this 
salvation is through means of grace dispensed by the church, such as the 
mass,  whereby  the  grace  of  Christ  is  substantially  ingested,  digested, 
and  infused  into  the  person.  That  person  cooperates  with  this  grace, 
progressively produces good works, is progressively justified, and hopes, 
though unsure, for final justification at the day of God’s final verdict. 
 
(f)  Roman Catholic definitions of justification. 
 
1)  Thus  Roman  Catholic  justification  is  really  a  sanctifying  process, 
in  which  a  person  is  infused  with  grace.    However,  this  church 
vehemently  denies  the  biblical  and  Pauline  gospel  wherein 
justification  occurs  at  the  point  of  initial  saving  faith,  and  such 
faith  is  in  Christ’s objective  atonement  whereby  all  sin  is  forgiven 
and his perfect righteousness imputed. 
 
2)   So  the  Council  of  Trent  stated  in  1547,  Chapter  16,  Canons  11-
12:  “If  anyone  saith,  that  men  are  justified,  either  by  the  sole 
imputation of the justice of Christ, or by the sole remission of sins, 
to the exclusion of the grace and the charity which is poured forth 
in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, and is inherent in them; or even 
that the grace, whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God: 
let him be anathema [accursed, excommunicated]. If any one saith, 
that  justifying  faith  is  nothing  else  but  confidence  in  the  divine 
mercy  which  remits sins  for Christ’s  sake;  or, that  this  confidence 
alone is that whereby we are justified: let him be anathema.”
23
 
                                                
22
 Murray significantly comments, “It is symptomatic of the total discrepancy between Rome’s position and the 
teaching  of  Scripture  that  baptism  should  be  conceived  of  as  the  instrumental  cause.  The  efficiency  that 
Scripture accords to faith Rome accords to baptism,” Romans, I, p. 361. 
23
  Philip Schaff, The Creeds of Christendom, II, pp. 112-3. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
100
3)  So  a  recent,  highly  authoritative  Roman  Catholic  commentary 
declares concerning Romans 3:24: “As always within the symbolic 
universe  presupposed  by  Paul  .  .  .  ,  the  justification  in  question  is 
God’s verdict of acquittal to be pronounced [sic] at the judgment.  
Moreover, the contrast with the preceding statement about sin (v. 
23)  suggests  that  ‘being  justified’  (dikaioÚmenoi,  dikaioumenoi) 
contains  a  significant  ethical  element:  believers  are  being  ‘made 
righteous,’  not  simply  ‘declared  righteous’  and  this  is  being 
achieved, not by a legal fiction - which would in effect be immoral 
(cf. Isa. 5:23; Prov. 17:15; Exod. 23:7) - but through a distinctive 
act of God’s grace effective in the redemptive work of Christ.”
24
 
 
4)  Concerning  the  charge  of  “legal  fiction,”  commonly  made  by 
Roman  Catholicism,  Moo  responds,  “As  Paul  uses  it  in  these 
contexts,  the  verb  ‘justify’  means  not  ‘to  make  righteous’  (in  an 
ethical sense) nor simply ‘to treat as righteous’ (though is really not 
righteous), but ‘to declare righteous.’ No ‘legal fiction,’ but a legal 
reality  of  the  utmost  significance,  ‘to  be  justified’  means  to  be 
acquitted by God from all ‘charges’ that could be brought against 
a person because of his or her sins. This judicial verdict, for which 
one  had  to  wait  until  the  last  judgment  according  to  Jewish 
theology  [and  Roman  Catholic  theology  in  a  perfect  sense],  is 
according to Paul rendered the moment a person believes.”
25
.  Also 
note that he who God justifies is at the same time regenerated (Tit. 
3:5-7),  and  such  life  from  the  Spirit  produces  holiness  in  the 
acquitted. 
 
c.  His grace. 
 
Here we move from the righteous character of the gospel into the realm of God’s 
motivation  and  attitude  toward  the  sinners  He  deems  to  justify.  Why  does  God 
freely pardon and declare to be righteous? Why does He stoop from heavens holy 
glory  and  condescend  to  save  thoroughly  polluted  individuals  from  their  earthly 
pigsty? The answer is the “grace” of God, which is that distinctive characteristic 
of His goodness and love whereby he determines to rescue sinners. 
 
(1)  Grace adored. 
 
For this reason, and especially for man who, in the depths of his heart finds  
himself  despairingly  engulfed  in  this  pigsty,  this  term  “grace”  becomes  the 
sweetest  expression  he  has  ever  heard  when  it  is  personally  applied.  Lloyd-
Jones  rightly  enquires:  “What  is  your  reaction  to  this  word?  In  many  ways 
this is what it means to be a Christian.”
26
 It is no wonder then that Christian 
hymn  writers  have  reached  their  sublimest  heights  when  attempting  to 
                                                
24
  Brendan Byrne, S.J., Romans, Sacra Pagina Series, 6,  pp. 125-6. 
25
  Moo,  Romans,  pp.  227-8  .  In  addition,  refer  to  Murray,  Romans,  I,  pp.  359-362,  also  the  works  of 
Buchanan, Bunyan, Edwards, Owen, Turrettin. 
26
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 3:20-4:25, p. 58. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
101
commend  this  wondrous  doctrine,the  acid  test  of  any  profession  of  the 
Christian faith. . . . Do you feel that this word ‘grace’ opens the very gates of 
heaven to you? That is really  
 
(e)  Philip Doddridge, 1702-51, writes: 
Grace ‘tis a charming sound,  
   Harmonious to the ear: 
Heav’n with the echo shall resound, 
   And all the earth shall hear. 
 
(f)  Samuel  Davies,  1723-61,  successor  to  Jonathan  Edwards  as  the 
president of Princeton College, writes: 
Great God of wonders, all Thy ways are 
   Matchless, God-like, and divine: 
But the fair glories of Thy grace, more 
   God-like and unrivaled shine. 
(g)  John Newton, 1725-1807, the converted,  blaspheming and debauched 
slave-trader, writes:  
Amazing grace! How sweet the sound, 
   That saved a wretch like me! 
I once was lost, but now am found; 
   Was blind, but now I see. 
 ‘Twas grace that taught my heart to fear, 
   And grace my fears relieved; 
How precious did that grace appear 
   The hour I first believed! 
Through many dangers, toils and snares 
   I have already come; 
‘Tis grace has brought me safe thus far, 
   And grace will lead me home. 
(2)  Grace defined. 
 
Some  rather  loose  definitions  are  commonly  heard  such  as  “unmerited 
favor,”  which  is  true  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  does  not  go  far  enough.  Then 
there  is  the  acronym,  “God’s  Riches  At  Christ’s  Expense,”  which  is  quite 
inadequate since it gives no hint of man’s condition. 
 
(e)  The  word  here  is  c£rij,  charis,  which  can  have  a  variety  of  meanings 
including  graciousness,  gratitude,  favor,  goodwill,  etc.  However,  it  is 
Paul’s usage that, in cases such as here, takes on a specific  meaning that 
is related to the character of God and man concerning the gospel.  
 
1)  Concerning  God,  “grace”  is  that  kindness  within  Himself  by 
which He is moved, “according to the kind intention of His will, . . 
.  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace,  .  .  .  according  to  His  kind 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
102
intention which He purposed in Him [Christ]” (Eph. 1:5, 7, 9),  to 
pardon  and  redeem  thoroughly  polluted  and  guilty  sinners,  the 
“ungodly”  (4:5),  those  “dead  in  trespasses  and  transgressions” 
(Eph. 2:1-10).  
 
2)  Concerning man, “grace” is that kindness from God which may be 
defined  as  both  “unmerited  favor”  and  “demerited  favor.”  John 
Murray  writes,  “We  cannot  think  of  sinners  as  merely 
undeserving;  they  are  also  ill  deserving.  The  grace  of  God  to 
sinners  is,  therefore,  not  simply  unmerited  favor;  it  is  also  favor 
shown to the ill-deserving, indeed to the hell-deserving. When Paul 
says, ‘justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus’ (Rom. 3:24), the grace in view must be understood on 
the background of the judgment of God referred to in v. 19.”
27
 
 
a)  “Unmerited  favor”  means  that,  in  the  sinner,  he  has  nothing 
to  offer,  even  a  grain  of  moral  virtue,  that  will  gain  God’s 
acceptance. 
 
b)  “Demerited  favor”  means  that  man  has  positively  offered 
cause for his condemnation, that is purposed rebellion, active 
hostility, and a catalog of iniquity.  
 
(3)  The God of grace. 
 
  “His”  grace,  in  context,  must  refer  to  God  the  Father,  the  source  of  grace 
that is mediated through His Son. Here then we are considering the grace of 
the triune God, so that the grace of the Father is essentially identical with the 
grace of the Son. 
 
(4)  The grace of God. 
 
  “Grace”  means  that  God  is  actively  for  prodigal  man  even  though  prodigal 
man  is  actively  against  God.  However,  it  is  the  particularity  of  the  grace  of 
God that results in wonder, astonishment, and adoring worship. For  biblical 
grace is not universal, but grounded upon God’s individual choice of certain 
sinners and His abandonment of others. 
 
(e)  The example of Paul. 
 
  The  saving  of  the  Apostle  Paul  perfectly  pictures  God’s  eclectic  grace. 
God laid hold of him while he was a militant rebel, so that having been 
converted  he  declares,  “But  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am”  (I 
Cor. 15:10). From his mother’s womb, God “called [him] . . . through 
His grace” (Gal. 1:15), and on later reflection he considered this “grace 
of our Lord was more than abundant” (I Tim. 1:14). 
 
                                                
27
  John Murray, Collected Writings of John Murray, I, p. 119. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
103
(f)  The example of John Bunyan. 
 
  As a young believer, weighed down with the recollection of his sin, we 
read in Grace Abounding To The Chief Of Sinners: “[N]ow was I sick 
in  my  inward  man,  my  soul  was  clogged  with  guilt;  now  also  was  my 
former experience of God’s goodness to me quite taken out of my mind, 
and  hid  as  if  it  never  been,  nor  seen.  .  .  .  [N]ow  I  sunk  and  fell  in  my 
spirit, and was giving up all for lost; but as I was walking up and down 
in the house, as a man in a lost woful state, that word of God took hold 
of my heart, Ye are ‘justified freely by his grace, through the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus’ (Rom. 3:24).  But oh what a turn it made upon 
me.  Now  was  I  as  one  awakened  out  of  some  troublesome  sleep  and 
dream, and listening to this heavenly sentence. I was as if I had heard it 
thus  expounded  to  me:  Sinner,  thou  thinkest  that  because  of  thy  sins 
and infirmities I cannot save thy soul, but behold my Son is by me, and 
upon him I look, and not on thee, and will deal with thee according as I 
am pleased with him.”
28
   
 
a.  Redemption through Christ. 
 
  From  the  truth  of  “free  grace”  we  move  to  the  “costliness”  of  this  free  grace, 
which is “the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.” From the “why” of the gospel 
we now move to the “how” of the gospel, with the resultant explanation taking us 
through to v. 26. While God may have a gracious desire to save guilty sinners, yet 
His character will not allow a fickle or morally indifferent response. If He as God 
is morally unchanging, then His holy character demands that all sin be punished. 
And  this  being  so,  then  the  sin  of  all  mankind  must  be  satisfactorily  punished. 
Therefore, the problem for the manifestation of the grace of God is revealed in the 
psalmist’s  declaration,  “If  Thou,  LORD,  shouldst  mark  iniquities,  O  LORD,  who 
could  stand?”(Ps.  130:3).  The  answer  then  given  is  encouraging,  for  in  the  next 
verse  we  read,  “But  there  is  forgiveness  with  Thee,  that  Thou  mayest  be  feared” 
(Ps.  130:4).    But  it  is  in  v.  7  that  we  learn  of  the  “how”  concerning  this  act  of 
pardon,  for  there  we  are  told,  “For  with  the  LORD  there  is  lovingkindness,  and 
with Him is abundant redemption” (Ps. 130:3-4).   
 
(1)  Redemption defined. 
 
  The word ¢polÚtrwsij, apolutro¯ sis, is a strengthened form of a word which, 
in  its  classical  form,  meant  “to  loose,”  hence  to  loosen  clothing,  armor, 
animals,  etc.  Then  it  became  distinctively  associated  with  loosing  by  means 
of  a  payment  or  price,  and  this  ransoming  aspect  is  its  essential 
characteristic. Often it refers to the ransoming of a prisoner of war or slave. 
A  master  might,  out  of  kindness,  pay  for  a  slave’s  freedom;  sometimes  the 
slave  was  purchased  for  a  heathen  god,  though  he  was  regarded  as  free  but 
subject to that god. 
 
 
                                                
28
  Bunyan, Works, I, §§ 257-8, p. 39.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
104
(a)  In the Old Testament. 
 
  The  most  impressive  definition  here  concerns  the  redemption  of  Israel 
from  captivity  in  Egypt.  From  this  representation  is  clearly  seen  three 
distinct elements that comprise the meaning of redemption. 
 
1)  An assumed captivity. Here is a nation in bondage (Ex. 2:23; Deut. 
15:15). Of course it is assumed that the captive nation is incapable 
of freeing itself. 
 
2)  The  necessity  of  payment  of  a  ransom  price.  Here  is  a  nation 
redeemed with a price (Ex. 12:13, 25-27). Of course inherent here 
is the gracious attitude of the Redeemer who is willing and able to 
redeem. 
 
3)  A  resultant  freedom,  liberation.  Here  is  a  nation  with  consequent 
freedom  (Deut.  8:7-10).  Of  course  the  possibility  of  returning  to 
former captivity is thought to be absurd.  
 
(b)  In the New Testament. 
 
  More  liberal  scholarship,  in  parallel  with  its  rejection  of  a 
substitutionary  atonement,  also  rejects  the  payment  principle  of  the 
word  “redemption”  and  simply  speaks  of  an  “act  of  freedom.”  In 
response  to  this,  refer  to  the  thorough  defense  of  “the  payment  of  a 
ransom price”  by  Leon Morris.
29
  Of  course,  the offering of Christ  as a 
sacrificial,  redemption  payment  does  not  mean  payment  to  Satan. 
Rather  it  is  the  offering  of  God  Himself,  even  satisfying  Himself  by 
paying the price to Himself.
30
     
 
(2)  Redemption in Christ. 
 
(a)  A presupposed bondage.  
 
  This  is  indicated  in  3:9  where  both  Jew  and  Gentile  are  described  as 
being “under sin,” that is captive to sin, cf. Galatians 3:22-23. Likewise 
in John 8:31-33 Jesus Christ implicitly describes man as enslaved to sin. 
Even in 8:23, the believer in a corrupt body awaits for the redemption 
of this body.    
 
(b)  A price to set free. 
 
  Paul will take up this point in more detail when he speaks of Christ as a 
“propitiatory  sacrifice”  in  v.  25.  It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  here  the 
moral, righteous necessity for the payment of a satisfactory price for the 
                                                
29
  Leon Morris, The Apostolic Preaching of the Cross, pp. 11-64. 
30
  Moo, Romans, p. 229-30; cf. Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 179.  
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
105
indebtedness  of  sinful,  guilty  men,  so  that  God  “might  be  just  and  the 
justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus,” v. 26. 
 
1)  This price is also the believing sinners substitute (Mark 10:45; it is 
of  infinite  value  (I  Pet.  1:18-19);  it  has  everlasting  efficacy  (Heb. 
7:25; Rev. 5:9-10). 
 
2)  This  price  is  the  Father’s  beloved  Son  (Matt.  3:17);  the  Father’s 
delight  (Prov.  8:29b-30);  the  Father’s  sole  heir  (Ps.  2:7-8;  John 
3:35); the Father’s glorious image (John 17:5; Col. 2:9). 
 
(c)  A resultant freedom. 
 
1)  We are free by Christ (John 8:34-36; Gal. 2:4; 5:1). 
 
2)  We are free under Christ (John 8:31-32; 15:14; Gal. 5:13). 
 
3)  We shall be free with Christ (Rom. 8:21: I John 3:2). 
 
b.  By way of application, what a glorious gospel is this. Free justification, delivered 
from  guilt  and  condemnation,  declared  as  righteous  as  Jesus  Christ.  Sovereign 
grace,  for  the  sinful  rebel,  through  God’s  tender  mercy.  Redemption  through  the 
payment of Christ’s shed blood, delivered from despairing bondage, established in 
liberty. Paul describes all three elements in Ephesians 1:7 (cf. Heb. 2:3): “In Him 
we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  our  trespasses, 
according to the riches of His grace.” 
 
 
B.  THIS RIGHTEOUSNESS IS CHRIST’S ATONEMENT, 3:25-26 
 
1.  Introduction. 
 
a.  At the commencement of vs. 25-26, the personal pronoun “whom” indicates the 
connection  between  “the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus”  of  v.  24  and  the 
precise exposition of this matter which is to follow. 
 
b.  In  vs.  25-26  we  are  told,  more  concisely  and  comprehensively  than  anywhere  in 
the Bible, why there was the necessity for Jesus Christ to be delivered up to death 
by  the  Father  (Luke  24:25-26;  Acts  2:23;  Rom.  8:32),  why  a  divine  ransom 
payment should be made.   
 
(1)  We  do  not  merely  suggest  there  are  several  theories  of  the  atonement  from 
which  believers  may  select  at  random  one  view  which  suits  their  fancy.  We 
desire  the  essential  biblical  reason  why  Jesus  Christ  died.  Consider  the 
evasive translation of the Good News Bible concerning Romans 3:24; I John 
2:2;  4:10  where  “propitiation”  is  simply,  “the  means  by  which  our  sins  are 
forgiven.” But such a translation purposely leaves open, for varying opinion,  
the  purpose  of  the  atonement,  and  ignores  the  precise  details  of  Romans 
2:25-26.   
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
106
(2)  There  are  four  essential  reasons  given  in  vs.  25-26  why  a  redemptive 
payment was decreed by the Father. 
 
(a)  So  that  God  might  be  propitious  through  the  substitutionary  death  of 
Christ, v. 25a. 
 
(b)  So  that  God  might  be  vindicated  through  the  substitutionary  death  of 
Christ, vs. 25b 
 
(c)  So  that  God  might  be just  through  the  substitutionary death  of Christ, 
v. 26a 
 
(d)  So that God might be the justifier through the substitutionary death of 
Christ, v. 26b. 
 
2.  Through Jesus Christ, God is propitious toward mankind, v. 25a. 
 
a.  The display of Jesus Christ. 
 
 The  phrase,  “whom  God  hath  set  forth”  KJV,  is  better  translated  “whom  God 
displayed  publicly”  NASB.  Again  we  see  that  the  gospel  is  essentially  what  God 
has done in spite of man, yet for man. 
 
(1)  By  way  of  illustration,  when  a  man  inaugurates  a  great  plan  or  scheme,  he 
publishes  it  abroad  with  television,  radio,  and  press  publicity,  so  as  to  gain 
national  and  international  exposure.  Likewise  God,  having  designed 
salvation also displays it, He exhibits it, He advertises it. 
 
(2)  In  Galatians  3:1  we  are  told  that  “Jesus  Christ  was  publicly  portrayed  as 
crucified;”  then  in  Galatians  4:4,  “when  the  fulness  of  the  time  came,  God 
sent  forth  His  Son;  then  in  I  Peter  1:20,  “He  was  foreknown  before  the 
foundation of the world, but has appeared in these last times for the sake of 
you.”          
 
b.  The death of Jesus Christ. 
 
(1)  As propitiation. 
 
(a)  The Greek word here is ƒlast»rion, hilaste¯rion, and in a broad sense it 
is defined by the following word “blood,” that is the sacrificial blood of 
Jesus  Christ.  However,  ƒlast»rion,  hilaste¯rion  is  an  exceedingly 
important  word  that  needs  to  be  exactly  defined  since  the  character  of 
God is at stake. In this regard refer to the detailed study of this word by 
Leon Morris.
31
 
 
1)  In classical ƒlast»rion, hilaste¯ rion was used by pagan idolaters to 
signify  the  appeasing  of  a  god  and  the  averting  of  his  anger  by 
                                                
31
  Morris, Apostolic Preaching of the Cross, pp. 144-213. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
107
means of an acceptable, propitiatory offering. However, such gods 
were  capricious,  moody,  vindictive,  arbitrary,  open  to  bribes, 
inconsistent,  or  simply  very  human.  Yet  even  up  to  the  time  of 
Christ,  it  is  unquestioned  that  “to  placate”  was  the  primary  and 
predominant meaning in everyday living.  
 
2)  In the Old Testament, the family of words, of which this is one, all 
continue  to  have  this  primary  meaning  of  “to  placate,  turn  away 
from wrath.” 
 
a)  However,  here  God  is  morally  consistent  and  demanding, 
while  there  are  over  580  references  to  His  wrath,  which  is 
placated by the shedding of blood (Lev. 16:15-16; 17:11). 
 
b)  The  equivalent  Hebrew  word,  for  the  Greek  ƒlast»rion, 
hilaste¯ rion,  is  often  used  in  the  Old  Testament  regarding  the 
“mercy seat” in the tabernacle. So some have translated it as 
“mercy  seat”  in  Hebrews  9:5,  where  ƒlast»rion,  hilaste¯rion 
is  used,  such  as  the  NASB,  NKJV,  ESV,  cf.  “atonement 
cover” NIV. In other words, the place of sprinkling was “the 
place of propitiation.”  
 
i)  The  “mercy  seat”  was  a  solid  gold  lid  that  was  placed 
over  the  ark  (box)  of  the  covenant,  made  with  acacia 
wood  covered  with  gold,  3'9"  long  by  2'3"  square. 
Inside  the  ark  was  the  word  of  the  covenant,  the  Law 
(Ex.  25:21).  At  either  end  of  the  mercy  seat  (lid)  were 
two golden cherubs, between which and above the mercy 
seat, God dwelt. 
 
ii)  On the annual Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur, the High 
Priest sprinkled the blood of a goat upon the mercy seat 
as an atonement for all the sins of the children of Israel 
(Lev.  16:15-16).  Thus  the  mercy  seat  with  the  blood 
intercepted  between  the  Law’s  demands  (Heb.  9:24-28) 
and God’s consequent anger with law-breakers. 
 
3)  In  the  New  Testament,  “propitiation”  or  ƒlast»rion,  hilaste¯rion, 
means  likewise  “to  turn  God  away  from  His  wrath,”  or  “the 
cooling of the heat of His anger” when confronted with sin, based 
upon an acceptable sacrifice. 
 
a)  Contemporary  liberal  scholars  have  repudiated  this  idea, 
notably  C.  H.  Dodd  who  writes  concerning  the  New 
Testament  that,  “anger  as  an  attitude  of  God  to  men 
disappears, and His love and mercy become all-embracing.”
32
 
William Barclay takes a similar stand. 
                                                
32
  Ibid., p. 179. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
108
b)  But  what  of  the  doctrine  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  Romans 
1:17-18; 2:5-8; 5:9,  as  well  as John  3:36;  Ephesians  5:5-6;  II 
Thessalonians 1:7-9; Revelation 6:15-16? If God is not angry 
with  sinners,  then  why  the  violence  of  the  cross,  or  even  its 
necessity?    
 
c)  Hence,  certain  translations,  such  as  the  NEB  and  RSV, 
substitute  “expiation”  for  “propitiation”  since  this  former 
term  excludes  the  idea  of  appeasing  wrath,  though  it  retains 
the idea of sins forgiven, dealt with, pardoned. 
 
(b)  Hence  “propitiation”  in  Romans  3:25  means  the  turning  away  of  the 
wrath of God by means of the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ. 
 
1)  “Propitiation”  involves  an  attitude  in  God  and  not  a  change  in 
man. It means that Jesus Christ did not come to preach the gospel, 
but that he as the gospel might be preached. 
 
2)  “Propitiation” in Romans 3:25 involves four major elements. 
 
a)  Satisfaction of God’s justice due to His violated holiness and 
penal requirements. 
 
b)  Pacification  of  God’s  wrath  due  to  His  being  moved  within 
Himself to the hatred of sin. 
 
c)  Expiation  of  the  believer’s  guilt  due  to  the  Father’s 
satisfaction with His Son’s righteous, atoning payment. 
 
d)  Substitution of the believer’s punishment through Jesus Christ 
as the acceptable substitute. 
 
(2)  As the shedding of “His blood.” 
 
  It  is  the  shed  blood  of  Christ  that  is  propitiatory.  However,  “blood”  here 
does  not  simply  mean  “life”  (Lev.  17:11),  but  rather  “life  laid  down  in 
death,”  hence  a  sacrificial  death  as  pictured  by  the  Levitical  offerings  (Lev. 
17:11). The blood of Christ was as of a “slain” lamb (I Pet. 1:19; cf. I Cor. 
11:25-26).We often sing hymns about the “blood of Christ,” and rightly so. 
But sometimes we lose sight of the deep significance of this terminology and 
move more into the realm of religious sentimentality and abstraction. We can 
sing,  “there  is  power  in  the  blood,”  but  what  really  do  we  mean?  Here  the 
“blood  of  Christ”  is  the  righteous  God’s  instrumental  means  of  saving 
unrighteous  sinners;  it  is  His  blessed  Son’s  satisfactory  offering  of  himself 
unto a most vile death, the “just for the unjust, in order that He might bring 
us to God” (I Pet. 3:18). 
 
 
 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
109
(3)  As the object of faith. 
 
 The  display  of  Christ  crucified  may  be  universal,  but  the  appropriation  of 
His atoning righteousness is particular through faith, as John 3:16, 36 make 
clear.  Further,  it  is  faith  alone  that  links  the  sinner  to  the  wonder  of  the 
propitiated  God.  “Therefore  having  been  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 
with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ”  (Rom.  5:1),  that  is  “peace  from 
God.”  God  has  made  peace  with  rebellious  and  guilty  man!    As  Charles 
Wesley writes: 
And can it be that I should gain 
An interest in the Savior’s blood? 
Died He for me, who caused His pain? 
For me, who Him to death pursued? 
Amazing love! How can it be 
That Thou, my God, shouldst die for me! 
3.  Through Jesus Christ, God is vindicated before mankind, v. 25b. 
 
  The atoning work of Jesus Christ accomplishes many things, and most prominent of all 
is  the  display  of  God’s  glory  (Phil.  1:11;  2:9-11).  From  sinful  man’s  perspective,  the 
gracious  forgiveness  of  his  sin  is  of  overwhelming  concern;  but  from  God’s  point  of 
view there is something much more important, and that is the maintenance of his holy 
reputation in an unholy universe, that is His vindication, His justification when charges 
are brought against Him, especially concerning ongoing wickedness. 
 
a.  Why is Paul concerned about the vindication of God? 
 
 One  of  the  most  common  criticisms  that  is  brought  against  Christianity  and  the 
God of the Bible is the charge, “Where is there any justice in this situation? Why 
does  God  not  intervene?  If  He  is  omnipotent  and  merciful,  then  why  does  He 
seem  remote,  unconcerned?”  Usually  this  comment  is  designed  to  charge  God 
with  negligence  in  bad  situations,  while  these  same  critics  tend  to  take  credit  for 
the good situations. 
However,  the  genuine  Christian  will  desire  to  see  that  God  is  vindicated  before 
such challenges, and indeed, if the God of the Bible be God, then He also will be 
careful  to  uphold  his  reputation.  You  may  be  interested  in  God,  but  more 
importantly, are you concerned for God? Are you desirous that God be glorified, 
vindicated, justified,  that  His  name  be  hallowed,  His  kingdom  come,  His  will  be 
done, that His righteousness prevail (Matt. 6:9-10)? 
 
(1)  God’s reputation in general. 
 
  The  Bible  frequently  defends  God  in  the  face  of  evil,  especially  when 
punishment  and  calamity  seem  inappropriate,  and  sin  seems  to  go 
unpunished;  such  vindication  is  called  a  theodicy.  When  Job  feels  unjustly 
accused  of  sin,  he  implies  that  God  is  to  blame  (Job  40:8),  so  that  God 
responds  to  vindicate  His  ways  (Job  38:1-40:1).  When  Habakkuk  accuses 
God  of  indifference  when  sin  is  rampant  amongst  His  people  (Hab.  1:2-4), 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
110
God  responds  with  a  vindication  that  astounds  the  prophet  (Hab.  1:5-11). 
However,  the  supreme  vindication  of  God  is  the  atoning  work  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Here  Paul  introduces  this  aspect  which  emphasizes  the  “God-
centeredness” of his ministry, not mere utilitarianism. 
 
(2)  God’s reputation in the face of sin. 
 
(a)  It is “the redemption that is in Christ Jesus” that “demonstrates [shows 
forth] His [the Father’s] righteousness,” that is God’s just and righteous 
character. John MacArthur makes this point by titling his chapter on vs. 
25-26 here as, “How Christ died for God.” 
 
(b)  Ask the average Christian today what the atonement of Christ declares, 
and  the  predictable  answer  will  be  “the  love  of  God.”  This  is  not 
untrue, but it is a righteous love, a holy love, a satisfactory love, a love 
that in no way diminishes the demands of God’s moral perfection.  
 
(c)  In  other  words,  the  atonement  of  Christ  tells  me  something  wonderful 
about God, something that the sinners of this world ought to rejoice in. 
Why?  Because  while  the  gods  of  this  world  lack  integrity,  the  God  of 
the  Bible  has  perfect  integrity,  and  as  a  sinner  that  is  the  only  judge  I 
want to confront.   
 
(3)  By  way  of  illustration,  Dr.  Martyn  Lloyd-Jones  explains  this  glorious  truth 
about God as follows: “How can God forgive and still remain God? - that is 
the question. The cross is the vindication of God. The cross is the vindication 
of  the  character  of  God.  The  cross  not  only  shows  the  love  of  God  more 
gloriously  than  anything  else,  it  shows  His  righteousness,  His  justice,  His 
holiness,  and  all  the  glory  of  His  eternal  attributes.  They  are  all  to  be  seen 
shining  together  there.  If  you  do  not  see  them  all  you  have  not  seen  the 
Cross.”
33
 
 
b.  What necessitates the vindication of God? 
 
  The  KJV  unfortunately  translates  here,  “the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,” 
whereas  the  NASB,  similar  to  the  NKJV,  is  more  accurate,  “He  passed  over  the 
sins previously committed.” 
 
(1)  In that the Old Testament sacrifices did not actually take away the believer’s 
sin, true satisfaction for sin was obtained by Christ for transgressions which 
God temporarily set aside, overlooked. 
 
(a)  The  Old  Testament  sacrifices  were  promissory  notes,  but  the  value 
they represented was that which Christ provided for on the cross. 
 
                                                
33
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans 3:20-4:25, p. 106. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
111
(b)  While,  according  to  Acts  17:29-31,  God  “winked  at”  KJV,  or 
disregarded  past  sin,  yet  God’s  justice  required  that  it  be  ultimately 
dealt with. 
 
(c)  In  Hebrews  9:11-15,  the  Levitical  offerings  were  not  efficacious,  but 
they were indicative of that which was to come. 
 
(2)  Hence,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  ground  for  any  man’s  sin  being  forgiven, 
whether  he  live  in  the  Old  Testament  or  New  Testament  dispensations. 
Further, the Cross is the proof that God never overlooks sin in a final sense. 
Further,  the  Cross  is  the  great  proof  that  God  requires  from  men  a  penalty 
for their sins, except they be paid for by Jesus Christ. 
 
c.  Why did God “temporarily disregard” man’s sins? 
 
  It  was  “because  in  the  forbearance  of  God”  He  set  aside  the  sins  previously 
committed.  “Forbearance,”  ¢noc»  anoch¯ e,  means  “a  holding  back,  endurance,” 
or more technically “pretermission,” and in context here, temporary suspension of 
wrath.     
 
(1)  In justice, God could have rightly and immediately judged the world as guilty 
and  implemented  the  penalty,  even  with  Adam  and  Eve;  but  He  exercised 
self-restraint, tolerance towards man (Acts 14:16; 17:30; He proposed a plan 
that would manifest both his justice and grace (Gen. 3:15). 
 
(2)  Some might be tempted to interpret this restraint as indifference, but such an 
interpretation  of  history  is  utter  folly  as  was  the  case  during  the  time  of 
Noah  (Gen.  6:3;  I  Pet.  3:20),  even  as  it  is  today.  We  have  only  to  consider 
the  sudden  intervention  of  the  Cross  to  prove  this.  Sin  has  not  ultimately 
been overlooked. 
 
(3)  We  may  take  God’s  mercy  freely,  but  never  lightly.  Hence,  in  2:4-5  is  the 
warning:  “Or  do  you  think  lightly  of  the  riches  of  His  kindness  and 
forbearance and patience, not knowing that the kindness of God leads you to 
repentance? But because of your stubbornness and unrepentant heart you are 
storing  up  wrath  for  yourself  in  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous judgment of God.” 
 
d.  By way of application, Lloyd-Jones sums up this astonishing gospel exposition by 
Paul.  “Test  your  view  of  the  Cross.  Where  does  this  statement  about  ‘declaring’ 
His  righteousness  and  so  on,  come  into  your  thinking?  Is  it  something  that  you 
just  skip  over  and  say:  ‘Well,  I  don’t  know  what  that  means.  All  I  know  is,  that 
God is love and that He forgives.’ But you should know the meaning of this. This 
is an essential part of the glorious Gospel. On Calvary God was making a way of 
salvation so that you and I might be forgiven. But He had to do so in a way that 
will  leave  His  character  inviolate,  that  will  leave  His  eternal  consistency  still 
absolute and unbroken. Once you begin to look at it like that, you see that this is 
the most tremendous, the most glorious, the most staggering thing in the universe 
and  in  the  whole  of  history.  .  .  .  ‘When  I  survey  the  wondrous  cross  .  .  .’,  says 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
112
Isaac  Watts,  but  you  do  not  see  the  wonder  of  it  until  you  really  do  survey  it  in 
the  light  of  this  great  statement  of  the  Apostle.  God  was  declaring  publicly  once 
and for ever His eternal justice and His eternal love. Never separate them, for they 
belong together in the character of God.”
34
  
 
4.  Through Jesus Christ, God is just toward mankind, v. 26a. 
 
  Here  Paul  is  even  more  assertive  concerning  the  vindication  of  the  holy  character  of 
God as it relates to the saving of unholy man. For the Apostle, this is a moral universe 
because  the  moral  God  reigns,  and  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  widespread  immorality 
on  earth,  this  same  God  deigns,  at  great  personal  sacrifice,  to  save  man  while 
maintaining His integrity.   
 
a.  For emphasis, Paul restates the latter half of v. 25. 
 
  It  again  concerns  why  Jesus  Christ,  “the  Son  of  God  .  .  .  our  Lord”  1:4,  was  a 
necessary “propitiatory sacrifice” for sinners to be justified, redeemed. 
 
(1)  “To  declare  [emphatically]”  means,  as  in  v.  25,  to  “show  forth,”  or 
“manifest, clearly reveal, exhibit” the justice of God.  
 
(2)  “at  this  time,”  means  “in  the  now  time,”  cf.  “but  now”  v.  21.  God’s 
temporary  disregard  of  sin  is  past;  His  perfect  righteousness  or  justice,  His 
settlement  concerning  man’s  condition,  has  now  been  manifest.  Thus  the 
coming of Christ when he did was truly momentous. 
 
(3)  “His righteousness,” means “His justice” in dealing with a sinful world, that 
is His just condemnation of sinners and His just salvation of sinners.  
 
b.  Why does Paul declare that God is just?  
 
  Because the God of Israel has revealed Himself as being perfectly just, and in the 
face  of  sin  in  the  world,  this  revelation  may  be  in  question.  Further,  as  a  sinner 
man’s  understanding  of  God’s  justice  is  limited  and  needs  explanation;  in  his 
guilty condition he sees only the condemnation that is his due. But there is another 
aspect of God’s justice that the sinner ought to wonder at/ 
 
c.  What does it mean that God is just through Jesus Christ? 
 
(1)  It  means  that  all  the  sins  of  God’s  children  must  be  dealt  with  completely; 
there  is  no  lesser  standard  for  them.  It  also  means  that  all  the  sins  of 
unbelievers  will  be  finally  dealt  with  (Heb.  9:27;  Rom.  1:18;  2:1-3).  Hence 
all and every sin will be dealt with; God’s character demands it. 
 
(2)  It  means  that  all  seeming  injustice  in  the  world  will  be  finally  sorted  out 
by God (Ps. 73:3, 17-19), that purity and righteousness shall prevail, that 
the King of righteousness shall reign (I Cor. 15:25). 
                                                
34
  Ibid., pp. 107-8. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
113
(3)  It  means  that  my  sin  and  unrighteousness  must  be  dealt  with.  Justice  for 
others  demands  justice  for  myself.  Either  my  sin  will  be  judged  by  God  in 
myself  or  in  an  acceptable  substitute  (I  Pet.  3:18).  But  I  cannot  escape  the 
justice of God.      
 
5.  Through Jesus Christ, God is the justifier of mankind, v. 26b. 
 
  The order here is not insignificant. While God is unfailingly just, the astonishing good 
news is that He, at the same time, is a justifier, a pardoner, a Magistrate in the heavens 
who,  in  impeccably  upholding  the  law,  yet  bountifully  shows  mercy  to  the  guilty 
prisoner at the bar.  
 
a.  The God of the Bible is fully just and fully gracious. 
 
  While a God of justice without grace leads the guilty sinner to despair, so a God 
of grace without justice leads the guilty sinner to lack confidence. Further, a God 
who  is  partially  just  and  partially  gracious  is  not  God  at  all.  Rather,  the  guilty 
sinner needs a God who is both fully just and fully gracious, and this is the God of 
the Bible. There is no other God like this. 
 
(1)  God is both merciful and righteous (Ps. 85:9-13). 
 
(2)  God is both righteous and a Savior (Isa. 45:21). 
 
(3)  God is both righteous and a justifier (Isa. 53:11). 
 
(4)  God is both just and a Savior (Zech. 9:9). 
 
(5)  God is both righteous and forgiving (I John 1:9).    
 
b.  But how can it be known that God is fully just and fully gracious? 
 
  By  looking  at  the  atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  this  historic  display, 
especially as described here in vs. 25-26. 
 
(1)  Look  again  at  Zechariah  9:9.  Who  is  it  that  manifests  both  justice  and 
salvation?  It  is,  “your  king  is  coming  to  you;  He  is  just  and  endowed  with 
salvation, humble, and mounted on a donkey.” 
 
(2)  When  does  this  King  come  so  riding?  On  the  Sunday  commencing  Passion 
Week (Matt. 21:1-11). The following Friday he shall be made an offering for 
sin, suffering justice yet manifesting abundant grace. 
 
(3)  Here  is  the  most  amazing  of  transactions,  the  most  emancipating  of  all 
terrestrial events, the most glorious of all truths, that God Himself meted out 
the  full  fury  of  His  justice  upon  His  only  beloved  Son,  that  the  believing 
sinner  might  be  justified  by  a  just  God  (I  John  4:10).  So  Lloyd-Jones 
comments: “Somebody has described this [vs. 25-26] as the ‘acropolis of the 
Christian faith’. We can be certain that there is nothing that the human mind 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
114
can ever consider which is in any way as important as these two verses. The 
history of the Church shows very clearly that they have been the means that 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  has  used  to  bring  many  a  soul  from  darkness  to  light, 
and to give many a poor sinner his first knowledge of salvation and his first 
assurance of salvation.”
35
 Isaac Watts describes this gospel truth as follows in 
his paraphrase of Psalm 85:10. 
 
Mercy and truth on earth are met, 
   Since Christ the Lord came down from Heaven; 
By His obedience so complete, 
   Justice is pleased and peace is given. 
 
c.  But for this truth to be savingly known, it must be personally embraced. 
 
 It  is  not  enough  to  know  that  God  is  both  righteous  and  gracious,  just  and  a 
justifier  toward  sinners.  As  sinners,  even  Satan  and  his  angels  know  this.  Rather 
this  truth  must  be  personally  appropriated.  It  must  be  known  and  experienced, 
according  to  God’s  specific  and  individual  purpose,  that  He  is  both  just  and  a 
justifier toward me (Gal. 2:20). 
 
(1)  That God will finally be just with me, few men will doubt even though they 
consider such a confrontation with dread. But how can I know that He will 
also  be  gracious  and  merciful  toward  me  (Hab.  3:2)?  The  answer  comes  at 
the end of v. 26 where God is, “just and the justifier of the one who has faith 
in Jesus.” 
 
(2)  To believe in Jesus is to put to your account his righteousness, while he took 
to  his  account  your  unrighteousness.  It  is  this  transaction  that  is  alone 
acceptable to the only true and living God. To not believe in Jesus is to suffer 
personally God’s justice for your sins, and supremely that of your unbelief.  
 
 
C.  THIS RIGHTEOUSNESS OF FAITH EXCLUDES BOASTING, 3:27-31 
 
  Man is a natural and extravagant “boaster,” proud to the core, that is his fallen nature leads 
him  to  boast  in  himself  rather  than  God.  Notable  instances  take  us  back  to  the  tower  of 
Babel (Gen. 11:4) and on to Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 4:30). However, man’s universal claim 
to autonomy wedded to his penchant for religion leads him to audaciously boast before God 
whether  he  be  an  aristocrat  or  commoner.  That  is,  in  his  religion  he  attempts  to  impress 
with performance; he does not deny the need of God’s help, but like the boasting Pharisee he 
deceitfully declares, “God, I thank Thee [emphasis added] that I am not like other people” 
(Luke 18:11). In the name and cover of religion, this man boasts in his own righteousness. 
This  attitude  is  precisely  that  which  Paul  has  been  addressing  in  Romans,  and  now 
denounces in terms of the gospel he has just expounded in precise detail. Such denunciation 
then asserts the antithesis of boasting in human righteousness which is justification by faith 
in Christ’s righteousness. 
 
 
                                                
35
  Ibid., p. 95. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
115
1.  It excludes boasting in law works, vs. 27-28. 
 
  The  transition  of  emphasis  here  is  well  described  by  Moo.  “In  3:27-4:25,  Paul 
expounds the great theological thesis of 3:21-26. Or to be more accurate, he expounds 
one key element in that thesis. For we hear no more in 3:27-4:25 about atonement, or 
the  demonstration  of  God’s  righteousness,  or  the  provision  for  sins  under  the  Old 
Covenant.  Rather,  Paul  concentrates  on  the  vital  theme  stated  in  v.  22:  ‘the 
righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe.’ Faith is the topic 
in every paragraph of this section of the letter.”
36
   
 
a.  Through the law of faith, v. 27. 
 
  In  typical  rhetorical  style  Paul  asks,  “Therefore,  where  is  the  boasting?”  that  is, 
what  place  has  the  self-congratulatory  fulfillment  of  “the  works  of  the  law” 
according  to  3:20?  It  has  been  “shut  out”  or  “excluded.”  In  fact  the  whole 
concept has been annihilated!  
 
(1)  The principle of law. 
 
(a)  Here  again  we  see  Paul’s  flexible  use  of  nÒmoj  nomos,  since  on  both 
occasions  in  this  verse  it  is  better  translated  “principle,”  “basis,”  or 
“rule.”
37
 Hence, in strongly affirming that “boasting” in law-works has 
been  eliminated  through  “faith  in  Jesus”  v.  26,  he  then  raises  the 
question as to the “principle” upon which this elimination of boasting is 
based. Do law-works exclude boasting? 
 
(b)  The  answer  is  an  emphatic  “No!”  since  “law-works”  inherently 
stimulate  boasting;  they  are  offered  for  personal  praise  and  reward. 
Further, at the root of man’s sinfulness is his delight in boasting. In fact 
to boast in law-works is to increase transgression, not eliminate it; such 
conceit is a denial of man’s dependence and the necessity of God saving 
power. 
 
(2)  The principle of faith. 
 
(a)  However, the “principle of faith,” by its very nature, does eliminate the 
human  tendency  to  boast  in  human  righteousness  since  faith  is 
dependent; it looks away from human ability to divine ability; it denies 
human righteousness and rests upon divine righteousness. 
 
(b)  John  Murray  well  describes  the  works/faith  antipathy  as  follows:  “We 
are  required  to  ask  how  the  principle  of  faith  is  so  rigidly  exclusive  of 
and antithetical to works of law in the matter of justification. The only 
answer  is  the  specific  quality  of  faith  as  opposed  to  that  of  works. 
Justification by works always finds its ground in that which the person 
is  and  does;  it  is  always  oriented  to  that  consideration  of  virtue 
                                                
36
  Moo, Romans, p. 243. 
37
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 185; William G. T. Shedd, Commentary on Romans, p. 85. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
116
attaching to the person justified. The specific quality of faith is trust and 
commitment to another; it is essentially extraspective and in that respect 
is  the  diametric  opposite  of  works.  Faith  is  self-renouncing;  works  are 
self-congratulatory.  Faith  looks  to  what  God  does;  works  have  respect 
to what we are. It is this antithesis of principle that enables the apostle 
to  base  the  complete  exclusion  of  works  upon  the  principle  of  faith. 
Only  faith  has  relevance  within  that  gospel  delineated  in  verses  21-26. 
And, if faith, then it is ‘without works of law’”.
38
 
 
b.  Through justification by faith, v. 28. 
 
 Here, more definitively, the “principle of faith” described in v. 27 is set forth. This 
is  Paul’s  summary  statement  concerning  the  essence  of  the  gospel  with  the  word 
“faith [alone]” being the key term.   
 
(1)  The assertion of the gospel, “we.” 
 
  “We reckon,” may allude to Paul’s identification of this fundamental gospel 
truth  with  that  which  the  whole  of  Scripture  has  maintained  since  the  Fall, 
including  the  proof  soon  to  be  offered  in  4:1-9  concerning  Abraham  and 
David. This inclusive identification may also involve apostolic agreement.   
 
(2)  The object of the gospel, “man.” 
 
  As  has  already  been  asserted  in  1:16;  2:9-10;  3:9,  22,  and  immediately 
following  in  3:29-30,  that  God  does  not  discriminate  within  a  universe  of 
sinners on the basis of race, whether Jew or Gentile, or sex, age, education, 
etc. The human race is defiled and the gospel is for the defiled human race. 
 
(3)  The righteous kernel of the gospel, “justification.” 
 
 In this key gospel verse, dikaiÒw, dikaioo¯ , refers to the necessity of a man or 
woman  having  a  righteous  or  holy  relationship  with  God.  This  is  man’s 
supreme problem on a vertical level, and God’s gracious remedy is to provide 
a  gratis  righteousness,  to  declare  a  believing  sinner  to  be  righteous  for  the 
sake of Jesus Christ’s righteous atonement.   
 
(4)  The hinge of the gospel, “faith.” 
 
(a)  “Faith” attaches the sinner to his atoning Savior; it is linkage. Faith in 
itself  does  not  save,  only  faith’s  saving  object.  Shedd  illustrates:  “Faith 
justifies  in  the  same  sense  that  eating  nourishes.  It  is  not  the  act  of 
mastication,  but  the  food,  that  sustains  life;  and  it  is  not  the  act  of 
believing,  but  Christ’s death,  which  delivers  from  the  condemnation of 
the law.”
39
  
 
                                                
38
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 123. 
39
  Shedd, Romans, p. 86. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
117
(b)  Luther  translated  here,  “faith  alone,”  and  while  he  added  a  word  not 
mentioned  in  the  original,  he  added  nothing  to  the  sense.  Thus  the 
meaning  of  his  translation  was  entirely  correct.  Roman  Catholic 
objection  at  this  point  overlooks  the  fact  that  Origen,  Theodoret, 
Hilary, Basil, Ambrosiaster, Chrysostom, Cyril of Alexandria, Bernard, 
and Theophylact, also added the word “alone” here.
40
 
 
(5)  The antithesis of the gospel, “works of the law.”   
 
  The  “works  of  the  law,”  while  most  clearly  illustrated  within  Judaism,  yet 
refers  more  inclusively  to  any  human  endeavor  that  is  intended  to  impress 
God, as a basis for bargaining with God. But man’s epidemic pride is totally 
repudiated  here,  for  it  in  fact  concerns  what  are  only  putrid  and  corrupt 
offerings, filthy rags (Is. 64:6). So the Christian responds as Isaac Watts has 
written. 
When I survey the wondrous Cross  
   On which the prince of glory died, 
My richest gain I count but loss, 
   And pour contempt on all my pride. 
However, while the gospel utterly excludes “the works of the law” as a basis 
of justification, yet it demands fruit that authenticates “faith alone” or “sola 
fide” (Eph. 2:8-10; Jas. 2:24). 
 
2.  It excludes racial boasting, vs. 29-30. 
 
  Paul as a Jew, anticipates the thinking of alarmed Jews concerning v. 28, namely that if 
justification  with  the  one  and  only  God  comes  solely  through  faith  alone,  then  racial 
distinctives  including  circumcision  are  eliminated,  and  the  door  for  salvation  is  wide 
open. Their conclusion is correct; their alarm is unwarranted. Man in general over the 
ages has tended to maintain belief in national and localized gods, that is the gods of the 
Romans, Greeks, Assyrians, Egyptians (Ex. 12:12), even the God of the Hebrews (Ex. 
9:1, 13; 10:3), which tend to have localized features, such as a temple, etc. Thus God is 
marginalized. But Paul recognizes the incongruity of this tendency, especially amongst 
the  Hebrews  who  jealously  claim  that  there  is  only  one  God,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, and Jerusalem. 
 
a.  One God owns all races, v. 29. 
 
(1)  More literally we read, “Jews only is He the God of?” “Jews” here is in an 
emphatic  position.  The  obvious  answer  is  “No,”  and  the  Jewish  Scriptures 
indicate this (I Kings 8:41-43; Ps. 96:1-13; 98:2-3, 7-9).  
 
(2)  “Is he not the God of the Gentiles also? Yes of the Gentiles.” The principle 
of  faith  has  already  established  this  truth.  Though  as  Murray  adds,  “this 
                                                
40
  Moo, Romans, p. 250n., quoting the Catholic scholar, Fitzmyer. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
118
ethnic  universalism  of  the  gospel  must  have  dawned  also  upon  the  Gentiles 
with emotions of joy and wonderment.”
41
 
 
b.  One God justifies all races, v. 30. 
 
(1)  Paul’s  argument  here  takes  the  boasted,  exclusive  monotheism  of  Judaism 
and turns it upon itself in a way that surely left the Jew scratching his head 
concerning a significant truth he had not given the attention it demands. 
 
(2)  Thus,  “God  is  one,”  writes  Paul.  Biblically  and  logically  this  is  an  essential 
characteristic  of  God,  as  the  Jews  jealously  appreciated.  He  explains  in  I 
Corinthians  8:4-6,  “We  know  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  idol  in  the 
world, and that there is no God but one [Deut. 6:4]. For even if there are so-
called  gods  whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  as  indeed  there  are  many  gods 
and many Lords, yet for us there is but one God, the Father, from whom are 
all  things,  and  we  existed  through  Him.”  Further,  if  there  is  a  plurality  of 
Gods, then none can be God. 
 
(3)  Therefore,  all  of  creation  and  the  human  races  in  particular  are  under  this 
one  God’s  dominion  and  care.  Hence  this  one  God  justifies  the 
“circumcised”  (Jew)  and  the  “uncircumcised”  (Gentile)  without  regard  to 
racial  distinction.  For,  “there  is  no  distinction  between  Jew  and  Greek;  for 
the same Lord is Lord of all, abounding in riches for all who call upon Him; 
for ‘Whoever will call upon the name of the Lord will be saved’ (Joel 2:32)” 
(Rom. 10:12-13). 
 
(4)  By way of application, here then is a revelation of the large-heartedness of 
God which Isaac Watts has well described. 
People and realms of every tongue 
   Dwell on His love with sweetest song; 
And infant voices shall proclaim 
   Their young hosannas to His name. 
Where He displays His healing power, 
   Death and the curse are known no more; 
In Him the tribes of Adam boast 
   More blessings than their father lost. 
 
3.  It establishes the law, v. 31. 
 
  So Paul anticipates the objection of the exclusive Jew who enquires as to the remaining 
role of the law in the light of this teaching; it seems to have been eliminated. 
 
a.  The law is not nullified, v. 31a. 
 
(1)  “Therefore do  we  nullify  law  through  the  faith?”  But  what  does  Paul  mean 
here by the term “law” in its emphatic position? While it can mean Scripture 
                                                
41
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 124. 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD, THE GOOD NEWS 
 
119
broadly  speaking  as  in 3:19,  yet  in  4:3  Paul  asks,  “What does  the  Scripture 
[not law] say?” Rather it is the demand of the Mosaic law that is inherent in 
the expression “works of the law” in 3:28.
42
 It is the ethical imperative of the 
decalogue and pentateuch. 
 
(2)  So  Paul  vigorously  denies  that  the  ethical  essence  of  the  law  of  Moses  has 
been  “nullified,”cf.  3:3  where  the  same  katargšw,  katargeo¯ ,  is  used.  If  the 
moral heart of the law has been “disqualified, voided,” then God’s character 
has been “disqualified, voided” as well. His m¾ gšnoito, me¯ genoito, could be 
paraphrased, “perish the thought!”   
 
b.  Faith establishes the law, v. 31b. 
 
  There  are  two  aspects  of  this  “establishment  of  the  law,”  and  both  have 
convincing aspects. 
 
(1)  In  terms  of  immediate  context,  the  gospel  of  justification  by  faith,  which  is 
about  to  be  supported  in  the  following  chapter  from  the  examples  of 
Abraham  and  David,  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  by  means  of  Christ’s 
satisfactory  obedience  to  it,  both  active  and  passive.  Thus  in  Matthew  5:17 
the  Savior  declares:  “I  did  not  come  to  abolish,  but  to  fulfill  [the  law].” 
Lloyd-Jones gives seven reasons in support of this point of view, declaring, “I 
am  asserting  that  this  way  of  salvation  and  redemption,  above  everything 
else, honors the Law in all ways.”
43
 
 
(2)  On  the  other  hand,  while  the  law  is  not  nullified  by  means  of  “the  faith,” 
that same “the faith” being the body of saving gospel truth, it in fact brings 
about the true fulfillment of the law, it draws forth, through the Holy Spirit, 
the righteousness of the law in authentic Christian embodiment.
44
 The critical 
passage  in  this  respect  is  8:3-4,  where  “the  righteousness  of  the  law  is 
fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not  according  to  the  flesh,  but  according  to  the 
Spirit.”  Lloyd-Jones  makes  no  reference  to  this  passage,  though  in  his 
subsequent sermon on these verses he does maintain, contrary to Hodge, that 
Paul  here  is  emphasizing  “righteousness  imparted”  and  not  simply 
“righteousness imputed.”
45
 
 
(3)  To  sum  up,  Paul  indicates  in  Romans  that  the  power  and  dynamic  of  the 
gospel  fulfill  the  essence  of  the  law  by  Christ  and  in  the  believer.  Both  are 
                                                
42
  Lloyd-Jones,  Romans  3:20-4:25,  p.  141;  Moo,  Romans,  pp.  252-5;  Morris,  Romans,  p.  189;  Murray, 
Romans, I, p. 126; Shedd, Romans, p. 88 
43
  Ibid., pp. 142-9. 
44
  Moo, Romans, pp. 254-5. 
45
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 7:1-8:4, p. 304. “In other words, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us 
in two ways. The righteousness of Christ is ‘imputed’ to us; but, thank God, the righteousness of God is also 
‘imparted’ to us. The second is the process of sanctification which the Apostle begins to deal with in v. 5. . . . 
There is the imparted as well as the imputed righteousness. We have to insist upon this exposition, as against 
Dr. Hodge, because of the immediate context.” 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
120
certainly true,
46
 though the question remains as to whether both are involved 
in  the  meaning  of  v.  31  here.  In  the  simple  terms  of  1:16,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  “is  the  power  of  God  for  salvation  to  everyone  who  believes,  to  the 
Jew first and also to the Greek.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
46
  Morris, Romans, p. 189. 
CHAPTER VI 
 
ROMANS 4:1-25 - THE OLD TESTAMENT  
CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL 
 
 
N the light of Paul’s comprehensive exposition of the gospel up to this juncture in 3:21-31, it 
now  becomes  abundantly  clear  that  the  essential  thrust  of  this  message  is  that  of  justification 
through  faith  alone.  The  proof  of  this  assertion  is  the  consequent  substance  of  the  section  that 
now confronts us. Here the thrust of 3:24, 28-30 is upheld as a timeless gospel principle, contrary 
to  a  perverse  legalistic  gospel  so  dominant  in  Israel,  that  has  been  foundational  since  the 
commencement  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  It  is  also  evident  that  while  the  Apostle  has  a  primary 
calling to the Gentiles, yet he appreciates a secondary emphasis which the Lord Jesus described to 
Ananias:  “He  [Paul]  is  a  chosen  instrument  of  Mine  to  bear  My  name  before  the  Gentiles  and 
kings  and  [emphasis  added]  the  sons  of  Israel”  (Acts  9:15).  Romans  confirms  this  secondary 
concern, not only in 1:16; 2:1-20 and substantially in chapters 9-11, but also here in 4:1-25. To 
the  Jewish  mind,  preeminently  in  Abraham,  as  well  as  in  David,  we  have  two  of  the  most 
impressive faithful models, and these decidedly uphold Paul’s gospel. 
 
 
A.  JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH ILLUSTRATED, VS. 1-8. 
 
The  supreme  ongoing  concern  of  Paul  is  how  any  human  being,  any  thorough  sinner,  any 
earthly  inhabitant, might  acceptably  stand “just before  God,”  2:13  (cf. 4:2;  I Thess.  3:13). 
Hence  we  are  not  dealing  here  with  a  mere  peripheral  matter  but  that  which  concerns  the 
most  vital  interests  of  a  human  soul  and  the  totality  of  the  human  race.  Therefore  a 
comprehensive  perspective  is  necessary  that  is  based  upon  the  fact  of  there  being  only  one 
God  over  all,  3:30.  The  expectation  then  is  that  this  God’s  gospel  will  have  a  changeless 
dimension  that  is  not  temporally  or  racially  restricted.  The  racial  aspect  has  already  been 
dealt  with,  3:29-30,  and  now  the  temporal  perspective  is  considered  which  causes  Paul  to 
look back 2000 years to the basis of Abraham’s standing before God. 
 
1.  Abraham was justified by faith, vs. 1-5. 
 
Humanly speaking, or “according to the flesh” as Paul puts it in v. 1, Judaism has its 
origin  in  one  man,  that  is  Abraham,  a  Mesopotamian  nomad  of  pagan  ancestry 
originating from “Ur of the Chaldeans” (Gen. 11:27-32). As the father of the faithful, 
the destiny of the individual Jew was rooted in him, according to the boast, “We have 
Abraham  for  our  father”(Isa.  51:1-2;  Matt.  3:9;  Luke  1:73;  John  8:39).  However,  by 
means  of  accumulating  tradition,  extravagant  and  absurd  legends  became  part  of 
Hebrew  life.
1
  One  significant  aspect  of  this  fanciful  adulation  was  the  merit  of 
Abraham  that  was  not  only  intrinsic,  but  also  transferable.  Thus,  if  anyone  was 
justified  by  means  of  his  own  good  works,  it  undoubtedly  was  Abraham;  so  his  seed 
was  to  follow  in  these  same  meritorious  steps!  In  The  Apocrypha,  Abraham  is 
                                                
1
  “The improbable and often unworthy and even grotesque features of Abraham’s career and character in the 
later rabbinical midrashim are of no religious significance, beyond the evidence they afford of the way Abra-
ham’s  unique  position  and  piety  were  cherished  by  the  Jews.”  The  International  Standard  Bible 
Encyclopaedia, I, p. 21. 
I 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  122
described as sinless: “Therefore thou, O Lord, God of the righteous, hast not appointed 
repentance for the righteous, for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, who did not sin against 
thee”  (Manasseh  8).  Further,  he  was  blessed  on  account  of  his  obedience  rather  than 
faith  (Sirach,  44:19-22).
2
  Edersheim  comments,  “‘The merits  of the  Fathers,’  is  one  of 
the commonest phrases in the mouth of the Rabbis. Abraham was represented as sitting 
at  the  gate  of  Gehenna,  to  deliver  any  Israelite  who  otherwise  might  have  been 
consigned  to  its  terrors.  .  .  .  In  fact,  the  ships  on  the  sea  were  preserved  through  the 
merit of Abraham; the rain descended on account of it.”
3
 
 
a.  His standing in the flesh, vs. 1-2.  
 
Paul  seems  to  primarily  have  Jews  in  mind  when  he  enquires  about  “our 
forefather  according  to  the  flesh.”  Abraham  is  tÕn  prop£tora,  to¯ n  propatora, 
Greek, “the forefather,” according to carnal generation, in contrast with spiritual 
faith generation in v. 11, and the question therefore arises as to what his natural 
seed in particular can discover from investigating his life as written in the Word of 
God.   
 
(1)  Question: “Is it recorded that Abraham boasted in his flesh before God?” v. 
1. 
 
In other words, “Laying aside the ‘the tradition of the elders’ (Matt. 15:1-2) 
and  the  ‘ancestral  traditions’  (Gal.  1:14),  what  fundamentally  was  the 
ground of Abraham’s status before God? Did he offer personal works as the 
ground of his justification?”  
 
(2)  Answer:  “No,  for  it  is  recorded  that  he  did  not  boast  of  anything  for 
personal justification before God.” v. 2. 
 
In  other  words,  “Hypothetically,  if  Abraham  is  described  in  Scripture  as 
being  justified  on  account  of  his  works,  then  he  may  well  have  had 
something to boast about in a given situation, perhaps before man. But that 
particular situation could not have involved his justification before God.” 
 
b.  His standing by faith, v. 3. 
 
What is recorded in Scripture is the primacy of faith in the life of Abraham. Hence 
the  quotation  of  Genesis  15:6  in  this  regard  is  of  great  importance  to  Paul’s 
argument, as in vs. 9, 22, 23, Galatians 3:6-7, for the following reasons. 
 
(1)  It  is  the  first  time  that  the  word  “believe”  is  used  in  the  Bible.,  and  it  is 
closely associated with a “reckoned [not earned] righteousness,”
4
 as the LXX 
use of log…zomai, logizomai, supports. 
 
                                                
2
  The Oxford Annotated Apocrypha, ed. Bruce Metzger, pp. 187-8, 219. 
3
  Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, I, p. 271. 
4
  Douglas J. Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 261. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  123
(2)  In the context of Abraham’s life, it falls within that period of his conversion 
whereby the covenant promise of God was initially given (Gen. 12:1-9) and 
cut” (Gen. 15:7-21).  
 
(3)  The  context  of  Genesis  15:6  indicates  that  Abraham  was  justified  through 
faith’s saving object, not the objectification of faith. We read that, “the word 
of  the  LORD  [Jehovah]  came  to  Abraham  in a  vision”  (Gen.  15:1). Thus  his 
faith was not in faith, nor was God pleased with the mere act of faith; rather, 
his  faith  was  focused  upon  Jehovah  alone  being  convinced  that  His 
sovereignty and integrity would certainly accomplish what He had promised. 
Hence we read that, “he [Abraham] believed in the LORD” (Gen. 16:6). As a 
result God was pleased that Abraham completely trusted Him for salvation. 
Thomas Olivers writes: 
He by Himself hath sworn, I on His oath depend: 
   I shall on eagles’ wings upborne, to heaven ascend; 
I shall behold His face, I shall His power adore, 
   And sing the wonders of His grace for evermore. 
 
c.  His standing illustrated, vs. 4-5. 
 
In  vs.  4-8  Paul  substantiates  the  key  verse  of  Genesis  15:6,  first  by  means  of  a 
secular commercial illustration and then subsequently with the case of David. The 
essential  contrast  remains  between  justification  before  God  by  means  of  either 
self-generated  works,  or  faith  alone,  by  “those  who  believe  in  Him  who  raised 
Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead,  He  who  was  delivered  up  because  of  our 
transgressions, and was raised because of our justification,” vs. 24-25. 
 
(1)  Works demand compensation, v. 4. 
 
(a)  This  commercial  illustration  postulates  a  person,  “the  one  working” 
(present  participle),  who  is  continuously  laboring  according  to  an 
employment  contract.  Hence  the  “salary”  is  based  on  “reckoning”  at 
the  end  of  the  day  and  not  according  to  a  “grace”  c£rij,  charis, 
settlement,  but  what  is  “due”  or  “owed”  or  “earned.”  Thus  the 
relationship of the employer to the employee is one of obligation. Hence 
Morris rightly comments, “It might fairly be said that Genesis does not 
speak of God as owing anything to Abraham or of Abraham as meriting 
anything from God, so that it was not works that saved the patriarch.”
5
 
 
(b)  By  way  of  application,  this  contractual  depiction  represents  the  most 
common  misunderstanding  of  a  relationship  between  man  and  his 
Creator,  namely  that  of  God  being  obliged  to  trade  acceptance  and 
heavenly  residency  for  proffered  merit,  that  is  neighborliness, 
philanthropy,  humanitarianism,  sincere  effort,  etc.  But  what  arrogance 
this  represents  on  man’s  part  who  fails  to  recognize  the  corrupt  and 
tawdry nature of his offerings as well as the infinite holy demands that 
God has revealed in His Word (Isa. 48:1; 64:6). 
                                                
5
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 197-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  124
(2)  Faith receives grace, v. 5. 
 
(a)  While  the  preceding  illustration  is  drawn  upon,  yet  the  frame  of  refer-
ence changes from the secular to the sacred. Thus, when Paul writes of 
“the one not working” (present participle), he is not, as Morris puts it, 
“canonizing  laziness”
6
  in  a  secular  sense  but  rather  transposing  the 
commercial  scene  into  that  of  the  right  response  of  the  sinner  toward 
God. Here the analogy of v. 4 finds concrete fulfilment. 
 
(b)  However  the  honest  sinner  is  to  be  “not  working,”  but  “believing  on 
the one justifying the ungodly” (three present participles). Saving faith is 
ongoing as is justification (Heb. 7:25). This principle is well illustrated 
in the life of Abraham who believed initially (Gen. 15:6; Heb. 11:8-10), 
and continued to believe (Rom. 4:18-21; Heb. 11:17-19). This is the life 
of  faith.  Again  the  contrast  is  between  works  offered  by  the  self-
righteous and faith offered by the “ungodly.” Who are the “ungodly”? 
They are like any other member of the human race, but distinguished by 
the fact that they know and frankly confess what they are in the sight of 
God, such as did Job (Job 25:5-6), David (Ps. 51:3-5), Peter (Luke 5:8), 
Paul (I Tim. 1:15-16).  
 
(c)  The  conclusion  then  is  that  for  the  ungodly,  just  like  Abraham,  “his 
faith [alone] is reckoned as righteousness.” Again, it is faith which has 
its  object  clearly  described  in  vs.  24-25.  Thus  Christ’s  perfect 
righteousness  is  “reckoned,”  log…zomai,  logizomai,  or  “rightly 
accounted” to the believing sinner; God as Judge brings down the gavel 
in  heaven’s  court  with  a  verdict  of  “not  guilty”  on  the  grounds  of  a 
righteous  settlement  of  the  sinner’s  sin  by  means  of  an  acceptable 
substitute’s “account payment.” 
 
(d)  By way of application, the essence of the biblical gospel is embodied in 
Paul’s  declaration  that  God  “justifies  the  ungodly.”  This  is  the  very 
antithesis  of  the  obligatory  relationship  between  God  and  man  so 
universally  believed  as  described  in  the  comments  on  v.  4.  One  of 
Jonathan  Edwards’  most  notable  sermons  is  based  on  v.  5  here  and  is 
titled  Justification  by  Faith  Alone  in  which  he  states:  “When  it  is  said 
that  God  justifies  the  ungodly,  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  our 
godliness,  take  some  goodness  in  us,  is  the  ground  of  our  justification; 
as,  when  it  is  said  that  Christ  gave  sight  to  the  blind,  to  suppose  that 
sight was prior to, and the ground of, that act of mercy in Christ; or as, 
if it should be said that such an one by his bounty has made a poor man 
rich,  to  suppose  that  it  was  the  wealth  of  this  poor  man  that  was  the 
ground of this bounty towards him, and was the price by which it was 
procured.”
7
 
                                                
6
  Ibid., p. 198. 
7
  Jonathan  Edwards,  The  Works  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  I,  p.  622.  It  is  significant  that  while  Edwards  also 
describes  his  experience  of  opposition  to  his  proclamation  of  this  doctrine,  yet  this  sermon,  the  text  here 
being an expanded form, was “remarkably blessed” as “God’s work wonderfully brake forth amongst us [at 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  125
2.  David was justified by faith, vs. 6-8. 
 
The case of David is confirmation of the case of Abraham, though perhaps in a more 
obvious  sense  since  this  king  of  Israel  was  such  a  conspicuous  sinner.  Justification  by 
faith  is  not  explicitly  mentioned.  However,  the  emphasis  upon  a  “reckoned/imputed 
righteousness”  as  opposed  to  meritorious  “self-righteousness”  leads  to  the  inevitable 
conclusion as Murray states it: “When Paul speaks of God as ‘imputing righteousness’ 
v. 6, he must be using this expression as synonymous with justification. Otherwise his 
argument would be invalid. For his thesis is justification by faith without works. Hence 
to ‘impute righteousness without works’ is equivalent to justification without works.”
8
  
 
a.  His blessing is freely reckoned righteousness v. 6. 
 
The quotation of penitent David in Psalm 32:1-2a describes his blessed relief when 
just  condemnation,  imposed  by  God’s  heavy  righteous  hand,  vs.  3-4,  is  relieved 
through the non-imputation of guilt (forgiveness) cf. v. 5, and the covering of his 
sin  (imputation  of  righteousness).  Here  the  essence  of  David’s  bliss  is  righteous 
standing  before  God  on  the  basis  of  pure  grace  and  not  human  toil,  cf.  v.  7.  As 
Augustus Toplady has writen: 
Not the labors of my hands 
   Can fulfil Thy law’s demands; 
Could my zeal no respite know, 
   Could my tears for ever flow, 
All for sin could not atone: 
   Thou must save, and Thou alone. 
 
b.  His blessing is Scriptural justification, vs. 7-8. 
 
Paul’s  quotation  of  Psalm  32:1-2b  from  the  LXX  is  commonly  agreed  to  have 
been David’s joyous response, cf. v. 11, to that forgiveness he received from God 
following  his  sin  against  Bathsheba  and  Uriah.  Such  a  setting  in  the  Writings  of 
the  Old  Testament,  in  addition  to  the  witness  of  Abraham  in  the  Law,  only 
enhances the argument of Paul that faith alone in God’s saving mercy has always 
been the repentant sinner’s only hope. 
 
(1)  Blessedness in transgressions forgiven, v. 7a. 
 
“Lawless  deeds”  are  transgressions  of  God’s  revealed  righteousness,  espe-
cially  those  which  are  inscripturated,  and  not  simply  the  Ten 
Commandments.  But  the  man  who  freely  receives  that  smile  from  the 
pardoning  God  he  has  offended  is  truly  blessed,  and  sings  with  Samuel 
Davies: 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
Northampton], and souls began to flock to Christ, as the Savior in whose righteousness alone they hoped to 
be justified,” p. 620. 
8
  John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 134. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  126
In wonder lost with trembling joy 
   We take the pardon of our God; 
Pardon for crimes of deepest dye, 
   A pardon bought with Jesus’ blood. 
Who is a pardoning God like Thee? 
   Or who has grace so rich and free? 
(2)  Blessedness in sins covered, v. 7b. 
 
The  parallelism  with  v.  7a  suggests  a  similar  truth,  another  aspect  of  God’s 
dealing  with  sin  which  involves  it  being  concealed  from  His  view,  and  thus 
not a source of divine aggravation. Of course implicit here is the covering of 
Christ’s  atonement  which  Isaiah  61:10  describes.  Thus  Toplady 
appropriately writes:  
A debtor to mercy alone 
   Of covenant mercy I sing; 
Nor fear, with Thy righteousness on, 
   My person and offering to bring; 
The terrors of law and of God 
   With me can have nothing to do; 
My Savior’s obedience and blood 
   Hide all my transgressions from view. 
(3)  Blessedness in sin not chargeable, v. 8. 
 
Negatively speaking, and reflective of 8:33-34, when transgressions and sins 
are  hid  from  view  having  been  covered,  then  there  is  no  possibility  (double 
negative) that God will condemn sin (singular). Thus happy is the man who 
worships  God  as  a  pardoning  rather  than  a  condemning  Judge.  So  Charles 
Wesley has written: 
No condemnation now I dread; 
   Jesus, and all in Him, is mine! 
Alive in Him, my living Head, 
   And clothed in righteousness divine, 
Bold I approach the eternal throne, 
   And claim the crown, through Christ my own. 
 
 
B.  JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH EXCLUDES CIRCUMCISION, VS. 9-12. 
 
That  the  principle  of  salvation  by  grace  through  “faith  alone”  has  already  been  forcefully 
presented is abundantly obvious. The proven universality of sin has called for the response 
of faith alone, in Jesus Christ’s satisfactory atonement, by Jewish and Gentile sinners alike, 
3:9-19,  22-23,  29-30.  In  this  context,  circumcision  has  already  been  mentioned,  that  is  its 
significance when heart circumcision is the case, 2:28-29. However, the Jew’s trust merely in 
carnal circumcision is invalidated when lawless living abounds, 2:25. But now, in continuity 
with the teaching that Abraham was justified through faith alone and by implication is the 
father of all believers, and in anticipation of the Jewish insistence that physical circumcision 
was  a  distinctive  medium  of  saving  grace  for  a  select  people  only,  another  powerful 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  127
argument  is  offered  which  must  have  severely  jolted  traditional  Jewish  teaching.  From  a 
logical  point  of  view,  the  zealous  Jew  is  bound  to  have  objected  that  if  faith  alone  saved 
Abraham, then his circumcision was of no vital saving importance. 
It must be assumed that this crucial gospel teaching in v. 3 and here in vs. 9-10 is relatively 
new to Paul, that is only understood subsequent to his conversion. Hence, from where did 
this  enlightenment  come?  The  most  likely  explanation  is  that  it  resulted  from  the  special 
biblical teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ himself (Acts 22:12-14; Gal. 1:11-12).  
 
1.  The insignificance of circumcision, vs. 9-10. 
 
Circumcision,  peritom»,  peritome¯ ,  is  literally  “a  cutting  around”  of  the  male  seed 
(descendant)  organ,  and  was  first  instituted  by  God  for  Abraham  and  his  seed  or 
descendants  (Gen.  17:10-13).  The  significance  is  that  the  succession  of  Hebrew  males 
visibly  indicated  their  incorporation  into  the  covenant  first  given  to  Abraham, 
especially  the  promise  of  Genesis  12:2,  7;  13:15;  15:18,  and  in  particular  17:8-11 
where God declares, “I will give to you and to your descendants after you, the land of 
your  sojournings,  all  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession;  and  I  will  be 
their God [emphasis added].” 
Thus circumcision was a “sign” and “seal” of the Abrahamic covenant, 4:11, that Jere-
miah later acknowledged had become an outward form that bore no relationship with 
a circumcised heart (Jer. 9:25-26). Thus, the mere rite became a mechanistic guarantee 
of a right relationship with God. By the time that Paul writes, circumcision has become 
a  ritual  that,  ex  opere  operato,  guarantees  salvation,  akin  to  the  contemporary 
mistaken belief of some in baptismal regeneration. Thus Jewish tradition at the time of 
Christ  maintained  that  physical  circumcision  ensured  entrance  into  heaven,  but  only 
destruction awaited the uncircumcised. 
 
a.  Abraham’s faith alone gained righteousness, v. 9. 
 
“This blessedness [David describes in v. 8],” of being truly right with God, “[does 
it come] on the circumcision alone or the uncircumcision as well?” This rhetorical 
question, which Paul postulates, arises in the light of the following reminder of the 
implications of Genesis 15:6. Actually the answer has been made exceedingly clear 
in 2:29-30. But the Apostle, knowing he has shocked the Jew, wishes to anticipate 
his expected objection and face the issue of circumcision head on. 
 
b.  Abraham’s faith alone preceded circumcision, v. 10. 
 
Now follows a rhetorical setup that leads to a devastating putdown. The question 
is  raised  as  to  when,  in  relation  to  his  circumcision,  was  Abraham  “reckoned  as 
righteous”  according  to  Genesis  15:6?  The  obvious  biblical  answer  is  that 
Abraham’s circumcision in Genesis 17:9-14 followed at least fourteen years after 
his  justification  by  faith;  thus  Abraham  was  saved  before  he  was  circumcised. 
Therefore  salvation  is  solely  by  faith  and  thus  circumcision  has  no  saving 
significance. 
 
 
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  128
2.  The significance of circumcision, vs. 11-12. 
 
In  a  strict  sense,  Paul  does  not here  declare  that  circumcision  has been  invalidated  on 
account  of  sola  fide.  Rather  he  establishes  the  true  relationship  that  existed  between 
Abraham’s faith and his circumcision. When rightly understood, they are not mutually 
exclusive but rather related according to cause and effect. As Murray states, “Paul did 
not  make  the  capital  mistake  of  thinking  that,  because  it  [circumcision]  had  no 
efficiency in creating faith or the blessedness attendant upon faith, it had therefore no 
religious significance or value.”
9
  
 
a.  It signifies the blessing of righteousness by faith for the uncircumcised, v. 11. 
 
(1)  It is a sign and seal. 
 
“Sign”  here  is  in  the  emphatic  position,  shme‹on,  se¯meion,  meaning  that 
which indicates, points or directs toward, cf. John 20:30-31. “Seal” here is in 
parallel  with  “sign,”  sfrag…j,  sphragis,  except  that  it  adds  the  meaning  of 
authentication,  confirmation.  Thus  circumcision  pointed  back  to  and 
endorsed  “the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  [Abraham]  had  while 
uncircumcised.” 
 
(2)  It aligns Abraham with the uncircumcised. 
 
For  a  people  who  so  distinguished  themselves  from  the  Gentiles  on  the 
ground  of  circumcision,  Paul’s  reasoned  declaration  that  Abraham  is  the 
“father  of  all  who  believe  without  being  circumcised  “  must  have  been 
shocking  indeed  to  the  Jew.  Again,  he  is  not  denying  the  validity  of 
circumcision in its rightful place as v. 12 indicates, but the primacy of faith 
alone incorporates both circumcised and uncircumcised into the body of the 
faithful  children  of  God.  Thus  the  Gentile,  through  faith alone,  becomes  an 
heir of a “reckoned righteousness,” and equally as acceptable as the Jew! 
 
b.  It signifies the blessing of righteousness by faith for the circumcised, v. 12. 
 
But in line with 3:1-2, the Jew as a physical descendent of Abraham with physical 
signification of this relationship retains the claim that God is “the father of [the] 
circumcision,” but not exclusively.                     
 
(1)  It is a sign and seal. 
 
For  the  true  Jew,  circumcision  has  significance  when  it  points  to  preceding 
saving  faith  in  God  who  justifies  by  faith  alone.  But  to  trust  in  physical 
circumcision as an instrumental means of justification is to believe in a false 
gospel (Gal. 5:2-6). In other words, the physical descendent of Abraham is a 
child  of  God  through  faith  alone,  and  a  true  Jew  through  consequent 
circumcision.  
 
                                                
9
  Ibid., p. 137. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  129
(2)  It aligns Abraham with the circumcised. 
 
Thus,  like  the  Gentile  people,  Abraham  is  also  the  father  of  the  Hebrew 
people.  But  the  Hebrew  can  only  claim  this  lineage  by  means  of  his  having 
the  same  faith  and  reckoning  that  Abraham  did  according  to  Genesis  15:6. 
Thus a Jew is not a Jew principally because of circumcision or in any causal 
sense., but rather through justifying faith (Heb. 11:1-40).  
 
c.  By  way  of  application,  in  terms  of  the  history  of  Israel  in  the  Old  Testament, 
while  God  ordained  certain  outward  forms  of  worship  and  ceremonies,  yet  He 
repeatedly  gave  priority  to  the  sincere,  humble,  attitude  of  heart  with  regard  to 
His  worship  above  all  else  (I  Sam.  1:22;  Ps.  51:16-17;  Isa.  1:10-15).  When  man 
falls from this priority he always tends to trust in external form, and in this regard 
the  Jew’s  reliance  on  circumcision  is  a  classic  example.  That  is,  man  takes 
legitimate ordinances and perverts them into either means of salvation or magical 
rites. 
For instance, both Christian ordinances have suffered in this way. Instead of water 
baptism witnessing to prior saving faith, it has become an instrumental means of 
salvation with regard to children and adults. Likewise the Lord’s Table, instead of 
simply  portraying  the  significance  of  Jesus  Christ’s  one  offering  for  sin,  has 
become,  especially  within  Roman  Catholicism,  a  supernatural  re-enactment  of 
Christ’s sacrifice at the hands of a distinctive priesthood. 
But Paul draws us back to the heart of a true relationship with God which is faith, 
that is a heart for God that is wholly dependent and not contributory or trusting 
in external means. Of course such faith in not merely cerebral or confessional, but 
intensely  heartfelt  as  sinner  David  describes,  “O  GOD,  Thou  art  my  God;  I  shall 
seek  Thee  earnestly;  my  soul  thirsts  for  Thee,  my  flesh  yearns  for  Thee,  in  a  dry 
and weary land where there is no water” (Psalm 63:1). 
 
 
C.  JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH EXCLUDES THE LAW, VS. 13-15. 
 
While the general focus remains upon the witness of the Old Testament to the only gospel of 
justification by faith, the specific emphasis pans from Abraham, David, and circumcision to 
the  role  of  the  law  in  contrast  with  promise,  that  is  two  opposing  lines  of  reasoning  and 
hope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Faith righteousness comes by promise, v. 13. 
 
Obviously “promise” here refers to Genesis 12:1-3; 13:14-17; 15:5-21; 17:1-8, which, 
it  has  already  been  established  in  vs.  1-5,  was  embraced  according  to  faith  alone, 
exclusive  of  law  performance.  By  its  very  nature,  “promise”  involves  a  sovereign, 
unilateral  guarantee  or  covenant,  that  is  ultimately  based  upon  the  immutable  holy 
character  of  God.  In  Galatians  3:17-18  Paul  has  pointed  out  that  the  law  could  not 
Promise    →     Covenant    →           Grace      →   Faith  →    Certain 
 
Law     →     Pentateuch    →      Performance     →   Works  →    Conditional 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  130
have been a justification factor since it was not given until 430 years after the giving of 
the Abrahamic covenant, that is the promise, “previously ratified [emphasis added]” by 
God. But here, through to v. 15, the argument is based upon the reasoned fact that law 
obedience and faith response, by their very nature, are mutually exclusive.  
However, it is important for Paul that this antithesis here, which upholds faith alone, 
applies not only to Abraham but also to “his descendants” or “seed” who by definition 
in  v.  16  are  all  Jewish  and  Gentile  believers.  Thus  “the  promise,”  that  offered 
“righteousness”  or  “righteous  standing,”  solicited  the  response  of  faith  alone,  not 
works, especially those of a Jewish character. 
 
2.  Faith righteousness is voided by the Law, vs. 14-15. 
 
Law  and  faith  cannot  merge  or  mingle,  as  Judaism  would  maintain  in  a  synergistic 
sense, and was the problem with the Judaizers that Paul opposed in Galatians 3:1-29. 
The  gospel  cannot  be,  “believe  and  behave,”  nor  is  it  a  mixture  of  “promise  and 
performance.” 
 
a.  The Law nullifies faith in the promise, v. 14. 
 
(1)  Earned heirship. 
 
A  supposition  is  offered.  What  if  those  who  trust  in  personal  performance 
and  law  keeping  are  the  true  recipients  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  that  is 
heirship in the family of Abraham? What if law works gain acceptance with 
God?  Then  faith  has  been  voided,  not  merely  diluted,  and  the  promise  is 
useless, disabled, because of the element of human contribution that has been 
injected. 
 
(2)  Promise nullification. 
 
Illustration.  Suppose  a  kind  and  wealthy  man  promises  to  give  a  poor  and 
needy man $100,000 purely on a gratuitous basis. However, the needy man 
insists  on  providing  labor  for the  next  five  years  to  offset the  free nature  of 
the  gift.  If  the  wealthy  man  accepts  these  terms,  which  tend  to  impugn  his 
kindness,  then  the  original  promise  is  nullified.  What  remains  is  a  different, 
conditional  type  of  agreement.  The  poor  man  can  always  claim  a  degree  of 
worthiness.   
 
b.  The Law brings about wrath, v. 15. 
 
(1)  The purpose of the law. 
 
Here  the  explanatory  point  is  made  that  the  person  who  boasts  in 
lawkeeping  is  denying  the  purpose  of  the  law,  which  is  to  bring  man  to 
wrath due to guilt, not reconciliation. The law is a condemning rather than a 
saving  instrument,  (3:20;  cf.  Gal.  3:19);  the  law  is  an  excellent  means  of 
diagnosis, but it is impotent to heal. 
 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  131
(2)  The absence of the law. 
 
Thus  law  and  transgression,  par£basij,  parabasis,  not  sin,  are  indivisibly 
related.  If  there  is  no  law,  whether  in  the  conscience  or  on  tables  of  stone, 
then there is no knowledge of sin; there can be no transgression of the law if 
there is no law! But the law has obviously been given, and with great clarity 
to  the  Jews.  The  reason  the  law  was  given  was  to  reveal  transgression, 
lawlessness, with equal clarity, and this it effectively does. 
 
 
D.  JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH INCLUDES ABRAHAM’S SEED, VS. 16-25. 
 
The flow of thought continues. If the right role of the law is appreciated as stated in v. 15, 
then  justification  by  faith  alone  becomes  the  operative  gospel  principle  in  a  most  exclusive 
and universal sense. 
 
1.  Abraham’s seed all have grace through faith, vs. 16-17. 
 
“Faith,” as emphasized in vs. 3, 5, 9, 11-14, and in contradistinction to “law,” is to be 
the essential and sole response of any sinner toward God.  
 
a.  He is the father of all who believe, v. 16. 
 
As a father produces like kind, so Abraham has produced a race of believers who 
have  identical  faith.  The  children  of  Abraham  have  the  vital  birthmark  of 
justifying faith that identifies them as being authentic and not illegitimate.  
 
(1)  The gospel through faith is of grace alone. 
 
Why? Because it is of faith alone. Grace and faith harmonize because faith is 
works-renouncing  in  a  total  sense  and  grace  can  only  operate  where  works 
are  totally  renounced.  Faith  cleaves  to  the  complete  work  of  Another  while 
grace  offers  the  complete  work  of  Another.  Faith  confesses  personal 
bankruptcy  while  grace  provides  full  payment  of  the  debt.  Human  works 
nullify this relationship. 
 
(2)  The gospel through faith ensures the promise for all the seed. 
 
Why?  Because  faith  does  away  with  racial  distinctions.  Law  concerns  only 
Jewish devotees. But faith is applicable to Jew and Gentile; it guarantees and 
validates  the  provision  of  the  gospel  to  “all  the  seed,”  pantˆ  tù  spšrmati, 
panti  to¯   spermati,  Greek.  But  how  can  we  be  sure  that  “all  the  seed”  is  a 
universal term and not exclusively Jewish? What proof is there that Abraham 
is “the father of us all [all the saints, especially in Rome]”? V. 17 explains.  
 
b.  He is a father of many nations, v. 17. 
 
Here  Paul  reaches  a  climax  in  his  argument  that  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  as  to 
the absolute nature of salvation by faith alone that totally excludes human merit, 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  132
energy.  or  contribution.  The  work  of  redemption  of  man  dead  in  sin  is  nothing 
less that a new creation, the sovereign provision of life for the dead. 
 
(1)  The Word of God confirms. 
 
The quotation of Genesis 17:5, given in proof of the applicability of faith to 
“all the descendants”of Abraham as comprising Jew and Gentile in v. 16, has 
two important aspects. First, “many nations” clearly refers to the Gentiles as 
heirs  ,  with  the  Jews,  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  (cf.  11:17-18).  Second,  “I 
have made [appointed] you,” perfect tense, tšqeika, tetheika, establishes the 
sovereignty of the grace that has accomplished such a saving work.  
 
(2)  The works of God confirm. 
 
So  Paul  is  moved  to  now  qualify  the  object  of  Abraham’s  faith,  namely 
“God,  who  gives  life  to  the  dead  and  calls  into  being  that  which  does  not 
exist  [has  no  being].”  The  allusion  clearly  seems  to  be  to  God’s  creative 
works  ex  nihilo  (Ps.  33:6-9;  Isa.  41:4;  48:12;  Jer.  51:15-16).  So  God  has 
determined  to  make  a  people  for  himself,  out  of  the  pit  so  to  speak  (Isa. 
51:1-2). Thus, “the justified bring nothing; they are as dead, as those who do 
not exist. But because of God’s creative call they are brought to newness of 
life”
10
 (Eph2:1-10). As W. T. Matson has written: 
Lord, I was dead, I could not stir 
   My lifeless soul to come to Thee; 
But now, since Thou hast quickened me, 
   I rise from sins’s dark sepulcher.  
 
2.  Abraham’s faith was in God’s promise, vs. 18-21. 
 
In  religious  society  in  general,  even  during  the  first  century,  the  term  “faith”  is 
common currency that falls from the lips of “believers” of every stripe and hue. Hence, 
the fact that Paul has given this term primacy of place, with regard to the only saving 
gospel, requires that he qualify its meaning and distinguish it from everyday parlance. 
It  is  one  thing  to  refer  to  the  faith  of  Abraham  such  as  in  Genesis  15:6;  it  is  quite 
another  to  understand  the  specific  quality  and  purity  of  this  faith.  In  particular,  it  is 
common for “faith” to be spoken of while at the same time “works” are incorporated 
into  that  definition.  But  here  Paul  makes  it  clear  that  the  outworking  of  Abraham’s 
faith was wholly exclusive of any performance on his part and singular in its constant 
trust in God.  
 
a.  He hoped against hope, v. 18. 
 
(1)  Literally we read, “Who beyond [and without] hope, [yet] on the ground of 
hope,  he  believed.”  Clearly  “hope”  and  “faith”  are  closely  related.  “Hope” 
is  not  weak  “faith,”  but  visionary  in  a  concrete  sense.  “Faith”  believes  the 
truth, but “hope” perceives its certain fulfilment. A prospective bride believes 
                                                
10
  Morris, Romans, p. 209. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  133
the truth of the promise of her fiancé to marry her. But beyond this belief is 
hope, that is the confident envisioning of the happy day of marital union. 
 
(2)  What specifically then was this faith/hope of Abraham? 
 
It was not, “as a ‘leap into the dark,’ a completely baseless, almost irrational 
‘decision’ — as Christian faith is pictured by some ‘existentialist’ theologians 
—  but  as  a ‘leap’  from the  evidence  of  the  senses  into  the  security  of  God’s 
word  and  promise.”
11
  Physical  evidence  indicated  no  possibility  of  fathering 
even one descendant; but Scripture truth declared in Genesis 15:5 the certain 
prospect of a host of descendants, a multitude of nations. Of course, such an 
astonishing expectation still required an initial descendant. 
 
b.  He contemplated his weakness, v. 19. 
 
(1)  Abraham’s faith was reasonable in that it weighed up all the options. When 
the promise came in Genesis 15:5, he “contemplated,” katanošw, katanoeo¯ , 
or clearly discerned his physical condition. The facts were that Sarah and he 
were  well  past  child  bearing  age  (Heb.  11:12),  “having  been  dead”  in  this 
capacity,  or  “worn  out,  impotent,”
12
  the  perfect  tense  stressing  the  present 
situation  originating  from  a  past  condition.  But  while  Abraham  was  “as 
good  as  dead”  humanly  speaking,  from  God’s  perspective  he  was,  on 
account of his faith, very useful. Such is the value of mature saints!  
 
(2)  The  age  of  “a  hundred  years”  draws  upon  Genesis  17:1,  which  is  13  years 
after the birth of Ishmael (Gen. 16:15-16) and 14 years after the “cutting of 
the covenant” in Genesis 15, and specifically v. 5 which Paul has just quoted. 
Thus Abraham’s contemplation of his impotence and the triumph of his faith 
were protracted. 
 
(3)  Application. “Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?” (Ps. 78:19). Can 
God  cause  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  to  Part?  Can  God  bring  forth  water 
from a rock? Can God bring forth streams in the desert so that it blossoms as 
the  rose?  Can  God  cause  the  barren  to  rejoice?  Can  Jesus  Christ  calm  a 
raging  storm?  If  a  man  dies,  shall  he  live  again?  The  world  in  general  and 
man  by  nature  answers,  “No!”  Abraham  believed  God,  that  is  His  clear 
revelation  and  not  mere  speculation,  in  spite  of  human  reasoning,  and 
affirmed, “Yes!” 
 
c.  He grew strong in faith, v. 20. 
 
(1)  The unwavering faith. 
 
“With respect to the promise of God, he did not waiver.” That is, Abraham 
never  doubted  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  though  he  did  consider  a 
                                                
11
  Moo, Romans, pp. 282-3. 
12
  Arndt and Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, p. 537. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  134
variety of ways that he speculated about concerning the actual outworking of 
the promise. 
 
(2)  The trials of faith.  
 
With respect to the testing of faith, Abraham entertained a carnal means, at 
the suggestion of Sarah, by which the covenant could be fulfilled (Gen.16:2-
4),  and  yet  he  accepts  God’s  rejection  of  his  proposal  (Gen.  17:18-19), 
especially  at  the  birth  of  promised  Isaac,  named  according  to  God’s 
command (Gen. 21:1-3). 
(3)  The progress of faith.  
 
Thus Abraham “grew strong in faith”, but how? Just as “muscles [do] when 
weights  are  raised;  holiness  when  temptation  is  successfully  resisted.  So 
Abraham’s faith  gained  strength  from  its  victory  over  the hindrance  created 
by  the  conflict  between  God’s  promise  and  the  physical  evidence.”
13
  At  the 
same  time  he  was  “giving  glory  to  God,”  that  is  “glorying  in  God,”  or 
growing  in  his  understanding  and  acknowledgment  of  God,  that  is  his 
holiness, integrity, sovereignty, etc.  
 
d.  He believed God would perform, v. 21. 
 
The  climax  of  the  faith/growth  process  is  described  in  terms  of  the  manner  of 
Abraham’s glorification of God, and it is wholly attitudinal and confessional. 
 
(1)  The character of the response. 
 
The true worship of God here is essentially in “spirit and truth” (John 4:24), 
that  is  the  soul  fully  comprehending  the  promise  and  expanding  in  its 
confidence  in  it.  But  further,  the  glorification  of  God  by  Abraham  here  is 
solely  that  of  a  “faith”  response  and  exclusive  of  any  performance.  Once 
again, sola fide continues to be the justifying principle. God delights in such 
“faith-full,” self-denying worship. 
 
(2)  The character of God. 
 
In  the  final  analysis,  it  is  the  nature  and  understanding  of  God  that 
determines  the  ground  and  strength  of  assurance.  If  there  is  doubt  as  to 
God’s  ability  to  accomplish  what  He  has  promised,  then  there  cannot  be 
strong  faith.  But  Abraham  believed  that  “He  [God]  was  able  also  to 
perform,”  that  is  He  had  “the  power  to  do.”  In  Hebrews  11:17-19, 
concerning the offering up of Isaac, Abraham “considered that God is able to 
raise men even from the dead.”   
 
3.  Abraham’s faith establishes gospel faith, vs. 22-25. 
 
The whole thrust of Romans 4 thus far has been a doctrinal argument concerning the 
essence of the gospel as personified in the life of Abraham and his justification by faith 
                                                
13
  Moo, Romans, pp. 285-6. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  135
alone. Obviously this reasoning has the greatest force with those addressees who have 
highly  esteemed  Abraham  and  the  Scripture  record  of  his  life.  Of  further  significance 
has been the use of the word “reckon,” log…zomai, logizomai, up to this point in vs. 3, 
4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  10,  11  of  chapter  4,  which  concerns  the  centrality  of  the  doctrine  of 
imputation  in  a  forensic  sense,  that  is  the  “reckoning”  of  God’s  righteousness  to 
Abraham on the ground of sola fide. Now in conclusion, this doctrine is pressed home 
by Paul upon his readers even to the present day, and for unmistakable emphasis this 
key  word  “reckon,”  again  as  a  consequence  of  faith,  is  used  three  times  in  vs.  22-24. 
Thus, out of 19 uses of “reckon” in Romans, 11 occur in chapter 4!  
 
a.  His faith establishes justification, v. 22. 
 
In  returning  to  Genesis  15:6  introduced  in  v.  3  and  repeated  in  v.  9,  we  have  a 
grand  QED,  so  to  speak.  The  cumulative  effect  of  this  evidence  leaves  not  the 
slightest room for any synthesis of faith and human performance in the minutest 
proportion,  or  of  faith  even  being  productive  of  justifying  works  through  the 
enabling  of  grace.  Since  the  Fall,  this  timeless  gospel  message  has  been  both 
perverted  by  man-centered  religion  and  preserved  by  faithful  heralds  of  God.  So 
Paul  now  exhorts  his  readers  to  continue  to  personally  embrace  and  defend  this 
glorious, soul emancipating, God glorifying gospel message. 
 
b.  Our faith establishes justification, vs. 23-25. 
 
Truth  has  consequences;  doctrine  calls  for  duty;  principles  require  practice; 
mentors are productive of models; so Abraham is the father of the truly faithful. 
Of  course  Hebrews  11  gives  a  broader  perspective  of  this“faith”  lineage  that 
encompasses Abel onward to “David and Samuel and the prophets” v. 32.  
 
(1)  It is the faith of Abraham as a mentor, v. 23. 
 
We  are  reminded  that  Genesis  15:6  was  “inscripturated,”  aorist  of  gr£fw, 
grapho¯ , and thus the purpose of this record was obviously not merely for the 
benefit  of  Abraham  or  even  his  immediate  generation  (cf.  I  Cor.  10:8-11). 
Implicit here is the useful concreteness of the written Word of God when the 
perpetuation of vital truth is at stake; verbal tradition is too unreliable. 
However,  the  vital  matter  for  permanent  documentation  is  that  of  the 
principle  of  “reckoning,”  that  is  a  grace  relationship  through  faith  alone  in 
an  “able”  God,  v.  21,  as  distinct  from  a  works  relationship  through 
participation with a cooperative God. 
 
(2)  It is the faith of Abraham that is to be modeled , v. 24a. 
 
The Scripture record is for the saints at Rome, and beyond. They too inherit 
the same gospel blessings, a “reckoned” righteousness through faith, and the 
intimation is that such readers are to stand more solidly than ever upon this 
truth;  their  sola  fide  is  to  be  more  “sola”  than  ever  before.  There  is  the 
further intimation that the church at Rome should review its gospel witness 
and make sure that it is precisely what Paul here declares.       
               
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  136
(3)  It is faith in Abraham’s God, v. 24b. 
 
While  the  “reckoning”  is  God’s  gracious  means  of  providing  “the  gift  of 
righteousness”  (5:17),  faith  alone  is  the  sinner’s  self-renouncing 
acknowledgment  and  embrace  of  sola  gratia.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Paul 
often  objectifies  faith,  that  is  describes  it  as  if  it  were  a  saving  object  itself 
(3:28-30; 4:16), nevertheless here he makes it clear that in reality it is faith’s 
object  that  saves.  The  object  of  true  saving  faith  is  Abraham’s  God,  who 
raised the Lord Jesus from the dead, and raises the ungodly from their death 
in sin, v. 17.  
Note  here  that  “those  who  are  believing  in  Him  [God],”  present  participle, 
describes  the  ongoing  character  of  justification  by  faith,  even  as  the  Lord 
Jesus remains an ongoing intercessor (Heb. 7:25).  
 
(4)  It is faith in God’s justification, vs. 24c-25. 
 
In  this  conclusion  of  Paul’s  argument  and  exhortation,  he  moves  from  the 
occurence of the Lord Jesus’ atonement to its purposes (cf. I Cor. 15:3). The 
truth  to  be  believed  in  a  personal  sense  is  summarized  in  the  fact  of  “Him 
[God  the  Father]  who  [bodily]  raised  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead.”  The 
purposes  of  this  mighty  happening  are  twofold  as  he  now  describes  them, 
and  according  to  Moo,  the  Apostle  may  well  be  alluding  to  Isaiah  53,  and 
especially  v.  11-12.
14
  These  truths  comprise,  according  to  Hebrew 
parallelism,  both  sides  of  the  one  gospel  coin,  namely  sin  remitted  or 
forgiven  through  Christ’s  death  (negative  justification)  and  righteousness 
imputed or reckoned through Christ’s resurrection (positive justification). 
 
(a)  Jesus Christ was delivered up for our transgressions. 
 
The  agent  of  delivery  is,  from  the  divine  perspective  and  according  to 
8:32; Isaiah 53:4, 10, the Father; from the human perspective according 
to Isaiah 53:3 and Acts 4:27, it is both Jew and Gentile. Of course for 
the believer it is the ultimate truth that Jesus Christ was delivered up for 
my  transgressions,  my  iniquities,  my  rebellion  (Isa.  53:5-6),  the  result 
being my justification, my pardon, my reconciliation (Is, 53:11-12).  
 
(b)  Jesus Christ was raised up for our justification. 
 
The parallelism here helps us appreciate that Paul was not formally, but 
rather  in  a  complementary  sense  attributing  the  justification  of  the 
sinner  to  Jesus  Christ’s  resurrection,  5:9.  Stephen  Charnock  illustrates: 
“Not  that  we  are  formally  justified  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  but 
that  thereby  God  declared  that  whosoever  believes  in  him  should  be 
justified upon that believing; for if Christ has not risen, there had been 
no certainty of the payment of the debt. In his death he pays the sum, as 
                                                
14
  Ibid., pp. 288-9. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT CONFIRMATION OF THE GOSPEL  137
he is our surety; and in his resurrection he hath his quietus est [receipt 
of proof of payment] out of God’s exchequer [treasury].”
15
 
 
                                                
15
  Stephen  Charnock,  The  Works  of  Stephen  Charnock,  V,  p.  442.  Similarly  refer  to  The  Complete  Works  of 
Thomas Manton, XX, p. 499. 
CHAPTER VII 
 
ROMANS 5:1-21 - THE REIGN OF GRACE OVER 
THE REIGN OF SIN 
 
 
HE  transition  from  the  preceding  gospel  teaching  of  3:21-4:25  to  5:1-21  may  be  likened  to 
that  situation  in  John  Bunyan’s  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress  where  Christian,  having  entered 
through  the  narrow  Wicket-gate,  is  told  by  Good-will,  who  represents  Jesus  Christ,  “An  open 
door is set before you, and no man can shut it.”
1
 In other words, having commenced the pilgrim 
journey  as  a  new  convert,  the  way  ahead  to  the  Celestial  City  is  one  of  glorious  hope  and 
sustaining life built upon a gospel foundation. So at this point in Romans, there is much more to 
the Christian life than mere entrance, that is initial justification, as vital a truth as that may be. 
Thus 5:1 introduces us to assuring prospects that do not leave the gospel behind so to speak, but 
rather  build  upon  that  same  gospel,  especially  its  foundational  roots,  so  that  an  enlarged 
perspective concerning its trunk and branches is productive of the fruit of sanctification.  
Shedd concisely explains the transition here as follows: “St Paul has described the necessity of the 
righteousness by faith, in Romans 1:18-3:20; and the nature of it, including its harmony with the 
Old Testament, in 3:21-4:25. He now proceeds to describe the effects of this righteousness, in 5-
8.”
2
   
Among faithful commentators, there is broad agreement that at this juncture, Romans proceeds 
with  a  distinct  change  of  emphasis,  though  there  is  disagreement  as  to  Paul’s  purposes  in 
continuity with regard to the sections that comprise chapters 5-8. Recollection of II Peter 3:15-16 
is  appropriate  here  where  this  Apostle  confesses  the  difficulty  of  understanding  some  of  the 
respected  Paul’s  teaching.  A  summary  of  this  writer’s  understanding  at  this  point  is  as  follows. 
Romans  5  has  continuity  with  Romans  8,  while  Romans  6-7  represent  a  hiatus  that  deals  with 
several problems which Paul anticipates with regard to the implications of his teaching.
3
 Romans 
5:1-11 is somewhat introductory, though it breaks into two related gospel grounded sections, vs. 
1-5  and  6-11,  that  conclude  with  an  a  fortiori  confidence  and  exaltation  in  the  saving  life  of 
Christ which is built upon “the reconciliation.” Thus in vs. 12-21 this saving life is heralded as a 
fulness of reigning grace that is reflected by means of antitheses between “the one and the many” 
and  “Adam  and  Christ”  and  “law  and  grace”  and  “death  and  life.”  The  consequence  of  this 
sovereign  grace  and  life  is  expounded  in  Romans  8  as  an  exultant,  triumphant  certitude, 
transcending temporal earthly trials, that the true believer is forever secure in the love of God.  
Here  we  have  reached  the  vortex  of  Paul’s  teaching  that  is  arguably  the  most  profound  in 
Romans. Moreover there is probably no other place in Scripture where the necessity of an acutely 
focused  and  renewed  mind  cf.  12:2,  employing  logic  and  reasoning,  is  more  necessary.  The 
implication of this fact is that biblical Christianity is based upon precise, rational truth and not 
flimsy  sentiment.  Of  course  it  does  not  stop  at  this  juncture  as  indeed  Paul  makes  abundantly 
                                            
1
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, ed. George Offor, III, p. 97. 
2
  William G. T. Shedd, Commentary on Romans, p. 110. 
3
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones strongly argues for this position, Romans, Assurance, An Exposition of Chapter 5, pp. 3-
7,  as  does  James  Montgomery  Boice,  Romans,  II,  pp.  504-6,  and  Douglas  J.  Moo  with  more  technical 
support, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 290-295.  
T 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  139
clear  in  his  teaching  that  follows;  however,  the  obvious  point  here  is  that  profound  spirituality 
and consequent assurance is based upon this substantial doctrinal truth and no other ground. 
 
 
A.  GOSPEL RECONCILIATION HAS GLORIOUS PROSPECTS, VS. 1-11. 
 
 Notice that “reconciliation” as a gospel synonym, first mentioned three times in this section 
of  Romans  in  vs.  10-11,  is  a  very  important  term,  and  thus  it  is  well  to  anticipate  its 
significance  at  this  point.  In  Romans  1-4,  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  has 
emphasized  the  objective  character  of  the  gospel,  that  is  righteous  acquittal  of  man  for 
Christ’s sake through faith alone. However, “reconciliation” stresses that the justification of 
the  sinner  allows  union  with  that  satisfied  God.  Thus  justification  by  faith  must  never  be 
separated  from  those  more  subjective  and  experiential  elements  that  are  integral  to  the 
gospel as a whole. The history of the Christian church is strewn with the lifeless wreckage of 
orthodoxy  concerning  justification  that  knows  nothing  of  being  alive  unto  God  and  thus 
exultant concerning the glory of God.  
 
1.  The glorious hope of reconciliation, vs. 1-5. 
 
Clearly  this  bracket  of  verses  is  a  contained  unit  that  proceeds  from  chapter  4  and 
introduces the reader to the outcome of justification by faith. As a whole the spirit of 
Paul here becomes animated and jubilant.  
 
a.  Peace with God through faith, v. 1. 
 
In  terms  of  the  intense  exposition  of  the  gospel  in  3:21-4:25,  this  verse  contains 
only one expression that stands out as adding new truth, and that is “peace with 
God.” Every other concept has been dealt with in detail.   
 
(1)  Two  technical  matters  concern  “we  have  peace  with  God.”  First,  the 
alternative  as  an  exhortation,  “let  us  have  peace  with  God,”  while  having 
better  manuscript  support  is  yet  overridden  by  the  far  greater  internal 
evidence  for  the  indicative  above.
4
  Second,  “peace  with  God”  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  the  “peace  of  God.”  The  point  here  is  not  that  we  have  the 
“peace  of  God”  (Phil.  4:7)  infused  within,  but  rather  that  we  are  at  peace 
with God because He is at peace with us; the barrier of sinful obstruction has 
been  dismantled,  the  chasm  of  separation  has  been  bridged;  hostility  and 
enmity between God and the justified sinner has turned to reconciliation and 
concord.  By  implication,  the  believer  responds  with  feelings  of  enjoyment, 
bliss, and contentment at the fact of the friendship that God has established. 
Murray explains: “Peace of heart and mind proceeds from ‘peace with God’ 
and  is  the  reflection  in  our  consciousness  of  the  relation  established  by 
justification.”
5
 
 
(2)  Implicit here is the truth that man is not naturally at “peace with God,” but 
rather  alienated  from  his  Creator.  That  is,  to  use  a  collection  of  Pauline 
                                            
4
  So Cranfield, Godet, Hodge, Moo, Morris, Murray, Shedd, etc. agree.  
5
  John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 159. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  140 
terms,  he  is  an  “enemy”  (Rom.  5:10),  “subject  to  God’s  wrath”  (Eph.  2:3), 
“alienated  and  hostile  toward  God”  (Rom.  8:7;  Col.  1:21).  Explicit  is  the 
truth  that  the  God  of  Adam’s  fallen  race  has  arranged  a  permanent  truce 
with  sinners  who  yield  to  his  faith  terms.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ’s  day  of 
atonement  is  at  the  same  time  God’s  armistice  day,  his  just  cessation  of 
hostilities to believing sinners. It is His doing, the terms being wholly of free 
and sovereign grace. 
 
(3)  God’s verdict declared to the believing sinner not only grants full pardon and 
right  standing,  but  it  also  provides  the  ground  of  His  intent  that  a  glorious 
adopted  relationship  be  established  by  means  of  which  the  riches  of  His 
grace will be inherited. Thus in Romans 8:31-32 we move from justification 
through  atonement  to  the  hope  of  this  spiritual  wealth:  “If  God  is  for  us 
[justification],  who  is  against  us?  He  who  did  not  spare  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered Him up for us all, how will He not also with Him freely give us all 
things?”  
 
(4)  By way of application, concerning the priority of being at “peace with God,” 
Lloyd-Jones comments:  
So  we  start  with  ‘peace  with  God.’  Before  we  come  to  consider  any  blessings 
we  must  always  consider  the  whole  question  of  our  standing  and  status  and 
position before God. It is almost baffling to understand how anyone can miss 
this.  .  .  .  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  seeking  blessings,  and  we  should  thank 
God  that  He  gives  us  such  glorious  blessings;  but  a  man  who  starts  with  the 
blessings  is  a  fool,  for  the  reason  that  he  may  not  be  there  to  enjoy  the 
blessings he is seeking. . . . The primary business of the Christian Gospel is not 
to give us blessings. I emphasize the primary purpose. Its primary function is to 
reconcile us to God.
6
 
 
b.  Access with rejoicing through faith, vs. 2. 
 
In  a  court  of  law,  a  man  on  trial  before  a  judge  is  remanded  or  under  certain 
restraints until the verdict is established. Should the judge deliver a ruling of “not 
guilty,” then the prisoner at the bar is free to enter into the enjoyment of normal 
civil life; it is highly likely that he will offer profound thanks to both the presiding 
judge  and  his  attorney.  So  Paul  here  describes  the  consequences  of  biblical 
justification  by  means  of  God’s  gracious  verdict,  these  all  being  grounded  upon 
faith in the sinner’s only effectual attorney, “our Lord Jesus Christ.”  
 
(1)  We have introduction, by faith. 
 
Jesus  Christ  the  “attorney”  obtaining  qualifying  pardon  is  also  the  “way,” 
the  means  of  “introduction”  and  “access,”  prosagwg»,  prosag¯ oge¯ ,  cf.  Eph. 
2:18; 3:12, by which entrance is gained into the straight highway of “grace” 
that the progressing pilgrim is to walk upon with sure-footedness. Note that 
“faith”  here  is  the  same  “faith” of v.  1  that  links  the believing  sinner to  all 
that  God  provides  through  Christ.  As  a  result  of  entrance  through 
                                            
6
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, Assurance, p. 10. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  141
justification into the kingdom of God, an ever expanding panorama presents 
itself to the new believer.  
 
(2)  We have grace, in which we stand. 
 
Thus  entrance  by  justification  is  “into  this  grace  in  which  we  have  stood, 
presently  stand,  and  will  continue  to  stand,”  consider  the  perfect  tense  here 
of  †sthmi,  hise¯tmi.  While  in  I  Corinthians  15:1  we  stand  in  the  gospel,  and 
here  as  well  this  stance  is  in  the  God  of  all  grace,  yet  Paul  has  in  mind  the 
believer  being  constantly  grounded  upon  grace  as  a  fundamental,  objective 
truth, literally “this grace.”  
Moo well describes this distinction when he explains that grace here is  
not the manner in which God acts, or the gift that God gives, but the ‘state’ or 
‘realm’ into which God’s redeeming work transfers the believer. It is the realm 
in  which  ‘grace  reigns’  (5:21),  a  realm  that  is  set  in  contrast  to  the  realm  or 
domain  of  the  law  (6:14,  15:  the  believer  is  not  ‘under  the  law’  but  ‘under 
grace’;  cf.  also  Gal.  5:4).  Without  denying  the  presence  of  God’s  grace 
throughout human history, Paul, along with the rest of the NT (cf. John 1:17), 
so  focuses  on  God’s  work  in  Christ  as  that  act  in  which  God’s  grace  was 
decisively and finally realized that he can picture the new status of the believer 
as one in which grace is characteristic and dominant. While this state of grace 
includes our justification as a key element, the notion goes beyond justification 
to all that is conveyed to us by God in Christ.
7
 
As John Newton has written: 
’Tis grace has brought me safe thus far 
And grace will lead me home.   
 
(3)  We have hope, in which we exult. 
 
(a)  The exultant effect of grace. 
 
When a sinner has been regenerated (made alive unto God) and justified 
(made right with God), his grasp of the truth that this saving work is all 
of grace will have an inevitable effect upon his life, and that particularly 
within  the  realm  of  assurance.  Thus  when  a  Christian  stands  upon  the 
grace  of  God,  it  produces  the  result  that  Paul  describes  here,  namely 
that  of  “exulting  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.”  To  “exult”  here  is  to 
“boast” or “glory” in the consummation of salvation which is rooted in 
Christ (Gal. 6:13, 14; cf. Rom. 2:17:23). It involves the eruption of the 
soul,  often  in  song,  that  cannot  be contained.  Thus  Paul  indicates here 
that the biblical Christian is much more than a person who is orthodox 
and  cooly  correct.  Rather  the  warmed heart will  desire  to  sing  as John 
Bowring has penned: 
                                            
7
  Moo, Romans, p. 301. Here footnote 38 also mentions that, “Bengel, Murray, Cranfield, and others confine 
‘this  grace  in  which  we  stand’  to  justification.”  However,  Calvin,  Haldane  and  Lloyd-Jones  support  the 
broader understanding.   
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  142 
In the Cross of Christ I glory: 
   Towering o’er the wrecks of time, 
All the light of sacred story 
   Gathers round its head sublime. 
(b)  The consummate hope of grace.  
 
To “hope” here is not the perspective of possibility or even probability, 
but  God-guaranteed,  grace-generated,  joyful  certainty,  as  8:30  affirms. 
And on the horizon of that certainty is “the glory of God” which here 
refers to the Christian’s final “glorification by God” in His presence. At 
the moment the child of God is undergoing transformation, “from glory 
to  glory”  (II  Cor.  3:18);  however,  the  completion  or  consummation  of 
this process shall be that time when, “we will be like Him, because we 
will see Him just as He is” (I John 3:2). So Charles Wesley has written: 
Finish then Thy new creation, 
   Pure and spotless let us be; 
Let us see Thy great salvation, 
   Perfectly restored in Thee; 
Changed from glory into glory, 
   Till in heaven we take our place, 
Till we cast our crowns before Thee, 
   Lost in wonder, love, and praise. 
  Romans  8  provides  particular  focus  upon  thus  future  tense  aspect  of 
salvation.  The  Christian  is  to  be  “glorified  with  Him  [Christ]”  (v.  17). 
There is the prospect of “the glory that is to be revealed to us” (v. 18). 
At  the  end of  this  age, “the  creation  itself  also  will  be  set  free  from  its 
slavery  to  corruption  into  the  freedom  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of 
God”  (v.  21).  We  are  told  that  “whom  He  [God]  justified,  [without 
intervening conditions] He also glorified” (v. 30).  
  The consequence of this teaching then is that of unshakable confidence 
on the part of the Christian, and Paul will reinforce this truth over and 
over again as his epistle proceeds. So Lloyd-Jones comments:  
  In other words, to understand the doctrine of justification rightly means 
that we have assurance and certainty of salvation. . . . If you are biblical 
you must take the same ground the Apostle Paul. Paul says that we must 
boast  of  this  [justification],  we  must  exult  and  glory  in  it.  But  how  can 
you do so if you are uncertain about it? This is also the reason why any 
doctrine  that  teaches  a  possibility  of  falling  away  from  grace  is 
unscriptural.  You  cannot  boast  and  exult  and  glory  in  the  ultimate  of 
salvation  if  you  may  suddenly  loose  it  all.  The  answer  is  that  it  is  all  of 
God, it is all of Christ, it is all of grace and by faith.
8
  
 
 
 
                                            
8
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition of Chapter 5, pp. 55-56. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  143
c.  Rejoicing in the fruit of tribulation, v. 3-5. 
 
Whereas  the  focus  at  the  end  of  v.  2  has  been  exultation  at  the  hope  of  the 
consummate  “glory  of  God,”  that  is  at  the  end  of  this  age,  Paul’s  mind 
immediately  turns  to  the  reality  of  exultation  as  well  in  the  darkness  of  the 
present. Note how this same contrast is made in 8:18 between “the glory that is to 
be  revealed  to  us”  (future)  and  “the  sufferings  of  this  present  time”  (present).  It 
could  be  asserted  that  while  it  is  relatively  easy  to  exult  in  the  future  it  remains 
difficult  to  exult  in  the  depressing  features  of  the  present.  In  anticipation  of  this 
estimate, Paul responds with “a graduated string of spiritual pearls,” so to speak, 
that, like v. 2, climaxes with the thought of “hope.” Moo adds here: “Sequences 
of  this  kind,  in  which  suffering  inaugurates  a  chain  of  linked  virtues,  are 
introduced as a stimulus to face difficulties with joy in two other NT texts (I Pet. 
1:6b-7; Jas. 1:2-4) and must have been popular in the early church.”
9
 
 
(1)  Rejoice that tribulation leads to perseverence, v. 3-4a. 
 
(a)  The “tribulation” that Paul exults or glories in is ql‹yij, thlipsis, being 
major  and  traumatic  trial  involving  pain,  ostracism,  and  deprivation 
(8:35-39;  I  Cor.  4:9-13;  II  Cor.  1:4-10;  11:23-28;  12:10;  II  Tim.  3:10-
12).  However  it  is  not  intrinsic  rejoicing  in  suffering,  in  some 
masochistic sense, but rather delight in the fruit of suffering in much the 
same  way  that  a  mother  rejoices  in  the  midst  of  suffering  because  a 
child has been born to her (John 16:20-22). So in I Peter 1:6, to “greatly 
rejoice” is not with regard to “various trials” in themselves, but rather 
the  anticipated  “inheritance  which  is  imperishable”  and  the  “salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last time,” vs. 4-5. 
 
(b)  Thus  there  is  a  benefit  in  “tribulation”  in  that  it  “  brings  about 
perseverence,”  or  alternatively,  “works/produces,  with  effort/toil 
[emphatic katerg£zomai, katergazomai, cf. 4:15; 7:8], endurance. Thus 
persecution is a profitable teacher; it is fruitful in the true child of God; 
that  is  impatience  is  tempered,  as  with  Joseph  unjustly  imprisoned  for 
two years (Gen. 40:23-41:1; cf. Heb. 5:8).  
 
(c)  However,  this  resultant  “endurance/perseverance”  is  also  a  teacher,  so 
that it works/produces (understood) “proven character,” again as in the 
character of Joseph. Persecution becomes the acid test that validates the 
regenerate  heart  quality  of  the  believer.  The  word  here  for  “proven 
character”  is  dokim»,  dokime¯,  which  is  used  in  a  similar  vein  in  James 
1:3, “knowing that the testing [emphasis added] of your faith produces 
endurance.”  
 
(d)  At  the  conclusion  of  Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners,  John 
Bunyan bemoans his ongoing struggles concerning inward conflicts. Yet 
he acknowledges the resultant benefits that obviously encourage him:  
                                            
9
  Moo, Romans, p. 303. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  144 
These  things  I  continually  see  and  feel,  and  am  afflicted  and  oppressed 
with; yet the wisdom of God doth order them for my good. 1. They make 
me  abhor  myself.  2.  They  keep  me  from  trusting  my  heart.  3.  They 
convince  me  of  the  insufficiency  of  all  inherent  righteousness.  4.  They 
shew  me  the  necessity  of  flying  to  Jesus.  5.  They  press  me  to  pray  unto 
God.  6.  They  show  me  the  need  I  have  to  watch  and  be  sober.  7.  And 
provoke  me  to  look  to  God  through  Christ,  to  help  me,  and  carry  me 
through this world. Amen.
10
  
Certainly of the tinker of Bedford it could be said that “perseverence led 
to proven character.”   
 
(2)  Rejoice that proven character leads to hope, v. 4b. 
 
The  sequence  continues  so  that  “proven  character”  works/produces 
(understood)  “hope,”  ™lp…j,  elpis,  that  is  a  favorable  and  confident 
expectation. Clearly “ hope” is a key term here, cf. vs. 2, 5, and it is Paul’s 
intent that this confidence be strengthened, even by means of an enlightened 
appreciation  of  persecution.  “Hope”  then  strengthens  by  means  of  its 
antecedent stimulants. So Moo illustrates:  
Hope, like a muscle, will not be strong if it goes unused. It is in suffering that 
we  must  exercise  with  deliberation  and  fortitude  our  hope,  and  the  constant 
reaffirmation of hope in the midst of apparently ‘hopeless’ circumstances [like 
Abraham  in  4:18-19]  will  bring  ever-deeper  conviction  of  the  reality  and 
certainty of that for which we hope.
11
  
Hence, the question is raised as to what is the object of that hope? and v. 5, 
in conjunction with v. 2, provides the answer. 
 
(3)  Rejoice that hope is confident in the love of God, v. 5. 
 
(4)  “Hope,”  like  “love,”  must  have  a  direct  object  on  account  of  its  transitive 
nature. Further, it is the character of the object hoped for that determines the 
legitimacy of the matter that we anticipate being realized. Many a person has 
hoped  for  that  which,  on  account  of  it  being  unreal,  has  only  resulted  in 
disappointment  and  despair.  Thus  Paul  specifies  the  exact  direction  of  the 
hope which he has been describing; it is a hope that “does not disappoint,” 
kataiskÚnw, kataischuno¯ , literally, it does not “put us to shame” as if it was 
an empty and impotent hope. There are two reasons why the hope that Paul 
describes  is  genuine  and  effectual.  First,  objectively  speaking,  we  have  the 
inscripturated  knowledge  of  “the  glory  of  God”  8:17-25,  v.  2.  Second, 
subjectively  speaking, we  have  “the  love  of God  [that] has been  poured out 
within our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us.” 
 
 
 
 
                                            
10
  Bunyan, Works, I, p. 50. 
11
  Moo, Romans, pp. 303-4. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  145
(a)  The outpoured love of God. 
 
This is the “subjective” love of God, that is His love for us rather than 
our love for Him, as v. 8; 8:31, 35, 39 plainly indicate. The direction of 
this  love  here  is  akin  to  the  “peace  of  God”  in  v.  1  which  is  likewise 
directed  toward  man.  This  is  not  to  deny  that  His  love  for  us  will 
generate, as a consequence through the kindling of the Holy Spirit, our 
love for Him (I John 4:19). However, it is important to understand here 
that mature Christian hope is grounded upon God’s sovereign initiative 
rather than humanly generated feelings.  
Moreover,  this  love  of  [from]  God  “has  been  poured  out  within  our 
hearts.” The perfect tense of ™kcšw, ekcheo¯ , stresses that which has and 
presently  continues  to  be  “outpoured”  into  believing  hearts,  and  more 
particularly the hearts of the Christians in Rome. This word, also used 
in  Acts  2:17,  18,  33  concerning  the  outpoured  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  cf. 
Titus  3:6,  describes  a  bestowal  with  great  abundance,  “unstinting 
lavishness.,”
12
  that  is  to  be  paralleled  by  the  abundant  outpouring  of 
God’s wrath (Rev. 16:1-4, 7, 10, 12, 17).  
It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  for  Paul,  the  former  Pharisee  who  so 
narrowly  conceived  of  the  love  of  God  in  such  exclusive  nationalistic 
terms,  the  result  of  Pentecost  was  an  overwhelming  sense  of  the  world 
being  deluged  with  the  love  of  God  in  tidal  proportions  that  had  now 
drenched the church at Rome. Warfield makes a similar point when, in 
distinguishing the new age of Pentecost with the past he writes:  
We  live  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  a  dispensation  in  which  the 
Spirit of God is poured out upon all flesh with the end of extending the 
bounds of God’s kingdom until it covers the earth; and that He is poured 
out  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  so  that  He  reigns  in  their  hearts  and 
powerfully determines them to do holiness and righteousness all the days 
of their lives.
13
  
 
(b)  The agency of the outpoured Holy Spirit. 
 
Clearly,  as  no  man  can  know  the  things  of  God  except  through  the 
Spirit of God (I Cor. 2:11), so no man can know of the love of God for 
him  except  such  truth  is  spiritually  communicated.  So  Paul  introduces 
here  a  theme  which  he  will  expound  upon  more  extensively  in  8:1-17. 
However,  a  question  arises  at  this  point  which  has  led  to  some  to 
suggest that this “love of God poured out within our hearts” refers to a 
post-conversion baptism with the Spirit, akin to the sealing of the Spirit 
in Ephesians 1:13-14, not to be identified with the modern Charismatic 
movement, since it could hardly be said that every believer has received 
such an overwhelming effusion, especially at an experiential level 
                                            
12
  C. E. B. Cranfield, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 263. 
13
  B. B. Warfield, Faith And Life, pp. 144-5. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  146 
Contrary to the opinion of Lloyd-Jones at this point, it would seem that 
here,  as  well  as  throughout  Romans,  Paul  has  in  mind  authentic 
believers  in  general  rather  than  a  Spirit-baptized  group  within  the 
fellowship  of  saints.
14
  This  is  not  to  deny  levels  of  spiritual  maturity 
amongst  Christians.  However,  the  text  here  quite  plainly  gives  no 
indication that as we move from the nature of justification, the resultant 
Christian  life  involves  a  distinct  experience  transcending  the  normalcy 
of conversion. Whatever outstanding experiences a child of God may be 
blessed with, and their authenticity is not in question, they must not be 
allowed to impose themselves upon biblical exegesis.  
 
2.  The glorious life of reconciliation, vs. 6-11. 
 
As the truth of vs. 1-5 commenced with the gospel, so vs. 6-11 also commence with the 
gospel. While vs. 1-5 represent a unit that establishes assuring conclusions based on the 
gospel of justification by faith alone, so vs. 6-11 likewise represent a similar unit that 
establishes related assuring conclusions based on the gospel of Christ’s substitutionary 
atonement. 
Now  “the  [objective]  love  of  God  [toward man  that] has  been poured  out  within  our 
hearts” v. 5 is described in more effecting detail. Justification by faith is liberating truth 
for  the  guilty  soul;  however  the  loving  purpose  behind  such  a  gospel  needs  to  be 
enlarged  upon  since  it  is  very  stimulating  in  terms  of  reassurance  of  reconciliation  in 
the face of past alienation.  
 
a.  We are saved by the love of God in Christ’s death, vs. 6-8. 
 
The  emphasis  in  v.  6,  “while  we  were  still  helpless  .  .  .  Christ  died  for  the 
ungodly,” and v. 8, “while we were yet sinners . . . Christ died for us,” suggests 
that Paul may have been musing on the question as to his status at that very time 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  impaled  on  a  Roman  cross.  In  other  words,  he 
pondered  the  astonishing  fact  that  at  the  very  time  in  history  when  Christ  was 
dying  for  him,  he  was  involved  in  rebellion  and  militant  sin  that  held  him 
helplessly captive.  
Note that the verb “die” occurs four times in these three verses, and this “death” 
of Christ “by his blood” delivers from “wrath” and results in “justification,” v. 9. 
                                            
14
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition  of  Chapter  5, pp.  78-102.   For  Lloyd-Jones  this baptism  by the Spirit 
takes  us  to  the  highest  level  of  assurance  and  usefulness  that  transcends  a  more  common  variety  that 
immediately follows conversion. Thus he states, “You cannot be a Christian without the Holy Spirit, but you 
can be a Christian without having the love of God shed abroad in your heart. . . . All Christians have not had 
this  experience,  but  it  is  open  to  all;  and  all  Christians  should  have  it,”  pp.  84,  85.  So  he  refers  to  some 
remarkable  experiences  from  the  lives  of  great  and  lesser  known  saints  such  as  Henry  Venn,  John  Fletcher, 
Richard Robarts, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards. Refer also to Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition 
of  Chapter  8:5-17,  in  which  he  expounds  on  this  view  in  greater  detail  and  gives  many  more  historic 
examples, as well as Lloyd-Jones, God’s Ultimate Purpose, An Exposition Of Ephesians One, pp. 243-311. 
John Stott is correct when he writes: “It is not my purpose to deny that such post-conversion deeper, richer, 
fuller experiences of God’s love are authentic, for they are well documented in Christian biographies. . . . My 
question  is  whether  Romans  5:5  is  primarily  intended  to  describe  unusual  and  overpowering  experiences 
which are given only to some, even if they are ‘open to all’. I think not.” The Message of Romans, p. 143.  
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  147
But  these  facts  must  be  understood  according  to  the  loving  purpose  of  God, 
which, when truly appreciated cause the Christian to “exult in God,” v. 11.  
 
(1)  When helpless sinners, v. 6. 
 
Paul  focuses  on  man  as  ¢sqen»j,  asthene¯s,  literally  “strengthless,”  as  a 
person  incapacitated  by  illness  (Phil.  2:25-27),  and  the  context  refers  to 
himself as living at the time of Christ’s birth. Thus at that time, and of course 
including fallen human history overall, man was incapable of raising himself 
up  from  his  captivity  to  sin  as  symptomatically  represented.  Surely  this 
inability  is  essentially  internal,  involving  an  unholy  soul,  affections  and 
choices.  Greek  and  Roman  culture  had  not  been  successful  in  affecting 
change  in  man’s  heart;  rather  both  empires  had  tended  toward  class 
consciousness, corruption, and tyranny. 
So Christ died “for” Øpšr, huper,
15
 “on behalf of” the sinner void of good,” 
that  is  “the  ungodly”(4:5).  Thus  both  representation  and  substitution  are 
involved,  not  mere  assistance  and  coaching  (Mark  10:45;  Gal,  3:13;  I  Tim. 
2:6).  This  love,  like  that  of  the  Good  Samaritan  who  “felt  compassion”  for 
the  man  left  for  dead  on  the  Jericho  road  (Luke  10:30-33),  contemplates 
impotence  along  with  pagan  misery,  but  also,  unlike  the  priest  and  the 
Levite, actively intervenes with saving mercy. 
But what is “the right time” here? It is God’s appointed time in world history 
suitable  to  His  decree,  the  ripening  state  of  the  nations  and  man’s 
predicament  (John  2:4;  7:8;  17:1;  Rom.  3:21,  26;  Gal.  4:4).  It  is  the  right 
time  according  to  the  prophetic  Scriptures,  for  the  Jews  to  be  provoked  to 
jealousy  and  the  Gentiles  to  be  incorporated  into  the  promise  given  to 
Abraham, the formation of the church, and the evangelization of the world. 
As Thomas Goodwin illustrates:  
There is, as you know, the first age of the world [the Old Testament], and the 
latter  age  of  the  world  [the  New  Testament].  You  may  justly  compare  it  to 
your hourglass, when the former age was expired, when all is run out, and the 
bottom glass is filled, then God cometh and turneth up a new administration, 
and beginneth another dispensation.
16
  
 
(2)  When unlovable sinners, vs. 7-8. 
 
Using  human  analogy  and  a  fortiori  argument  from  a  lesser  to  a  greater 
situation,  the  puny,  selfish,  shabby  love  of  man  is  mirrored  against  and 
wonderfully eclipsed by the determined love of God. So Paul reasons for an 
affecting  appreciation  of  this  love  of  God  directed  toward  destitute  sinners, 
to the end that the Christian will, like in v. 2, assuringly “exult [boast, glory] 
in  God,”  v.  11.  Such  an  ultimate  response  finds  its  supreme  expression  in 
                                            
15
  Refer  to  Moo,  Romans,  p.  307,  n.  65,  where  an  excellent  summary  of  the  relationship  between    here 
and  is given, also Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words, pp. 696-7.  
16
  Thomas Goodwin, The Works of Thomas Goodwin, I, p. 201. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  148 
8:37-39;  11:33-36.  Thus  we  should  sing  as  Elizabeth  Cecilia  Clephane  has 
written: 
Content to let the world go by, 
   To know no gain nor loss— 
My sinful self my only shame, 
   My glory all—the Cross. 
 
(a)  The lesser love of the world, v. 7. 
 
Here  human  devotion  is  illustrated  in  its  “best”  light;  yet  it  is  partial 
and  lacking  in  mercy.  The  major  components  are  self-interest  and 
worthiness. There is no thought of grace, only love that seeks a worthy 
object. 
 
1)  Analogy one, the “righteous” man. 
 
Consider  the  man  who  fulfills  his  civic  duty;  he  is  a  decent,  law-
abiding  person;  he  is  a  status  quo  citizen,  trustworthy,  reputable. 
He has not distinguished himself in being admirable or noble, but 
he is sincerely religious. However, it is unlikely that anyone would 
actually sacrifice their life for him. 
 
2)  Analogy two, the “good” man. 
 
He  is  certainly  a  cut  above  the  “righteous”  man,  having 
distinguished  himself  as  a  compassionate  and  wise  benefactor.  He 
is “good” because his heart is kindly; he is considerate of the poor; 
he  is  sensitive  concerning  the  troubles  of  others  and  one  who 
would readily go the extra mile. In this case, because of virtue and 
merit, someone might possibly consider dying for such a person. 
 
(b)  The greater love of God, v. 8. 
   
1)  It is unified love. 
 
The  love  of  God  is  identical  with  the  dying  love  of  Christ.  The 
atonement  of  Christ  is  God’s  atonement.  The  Father  was  not 
passive  while  the  Son  actively  died  for  sinners.  Rather,  “God  was 
in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  to  himself”  (II  Cor.  5:19).  The 
cross  demonstrates,  not  simply  the  love  of  Christ  but  the  love  of 
God (John 3:16).  
 
2)  It is superior, gracious love. 
 
Who  Christ  is  and  what  he  has  done  and  the  object  of  his  love 
prove the superior quality of the love of God. But the heart of the 
matter is God’s love for sinners in the person of His Son. That is, 
the lover of God is essentially gracious love, as distinct from man’s 
which is meritorious love. So George Goodman has written: 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  149
God commends His love—  
   Greater could not be; 
While I was a sinner, 
   Jesus Died for me. 
Jesus, Son of God, 
   Now your grace I see; 
You who loved the sinner 
   Gave yourself for me. 
b.  We are secure by the love of God in Christ’s death, vs. 9-10. 
 
The fact that “Christ died for us,” v. 8, introduces us to a broad vista of resultant 
benefits. So Paul reverts in both verses to his favorite a fortiori form of argument, 
cf.  vs.  10,  15,  17,  which  Moo  explains  had  its  rabbinic  form  using  “light  and 
heavy” propositions.
17
 Such a perspective comprehends great dividends that result 
from  the  investment  of  faith  alone  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  objective  ground  of 
justification.  The  future  aspect  of  “much  more  then”  here  in  v.  9  parallels  the 
future aspect of “we exult in hope of the glory of God in vs. 2, 4b. 
 
(1)  From wrath as well as guilt, v. 9. 
 
The minor premise is that we have been justified by Christ’s “[shed] blood,” 
and  as  a  consequence  personal  sin  has  been  justly  forgiven;  condemnation 
has  become  acquittal.  Whereas  in  3:24  we  are  justified  by  God’s  “grace” 
(His  attitude),  and  in  3:28;  5:1  we  are  justified  by  “faith”  (man’s  answer), 
here  we  are  justified  by  Christ’s  “blood”  (Christ’s  atonement,  “death,”  v. 
10).  
The major premise is that we shall be delivered from the penal consequences 
of  our  sin,  that  is  “the  wrath  [of  God],”  tÁj  ÑrgÁj,  te¯s  orge¯s,  and  the 
intimation  is  that  therefore  we  shall  be  saved  from  the  time  of  justification 
until  the  time  of  God’s  judgment  day,  cf.  8:30b.  Shedd  explains  that  this 
wrath  of  God  “denotes  a  personal  emotion,  and  not  merely  an  abstract 
attribute.  A  divine  emotion  is  a  divine  attribute  in  energy.”
18
  For  the 
Christian  this  wrath  has  been  placated  and  cooled  by  Christ’s  propitiatory 
offering, 3:25. However, here “the wrath” is future and anticipates “the day 
of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,”  2:5;  (cf.  Job 
21:30; Zeph. 1:14-18; I Thess. 1:10; II Thess. 1:7-8; Rev. 6:17). 
While the new believer is inclined to view his salvation with a narrow field of 
vision, namely justification as pardon, yet he is to grow with a broader vista 
concerning the multifaceted blessings of the gospel. Such comprehension will 
also result in not only wonder and praise, but also stability and assurance. 
 
 
 
                                            
17
  Moo, Romans, p. 309. 
18
  Shedd, Romans, p. 116. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  150 
(2)  By life as well as death, v. 10. 
 
The  minor  premise  is  that,  as  former  enemies  before  God,  we  have  been 
reconciled  to  God  by  God  through  Christ’s  death,  (“blood,  v.  9).  The  “if” 
here assumes the statement to be true. Thus, having been regarded by God as 
enemies, Murray describes it as, “God’s holy hostility to and alienation from 
us,”
19
  that  same  God,  though  offended,  was  moved  to  justly  remove  the 
enmity, to bring about reconciliation. This is wholly God’s doing, even as we 
have peace from God, v. 1 and love from God, v. 5; thus He is to be admired 
and  praised  for  it  (II  Cor.  5:18;  Col.  1:20).  As  with  vs.  7-8,  humanly 
speaking,  who  would  think  of  offering  a  son  unto  death  for  a  person  who 
deeply  offended  you,  to  bring  about  reconciliation?  Charles  Wesley  raises 
this question and gives the answer that it is God through Christ alone. 
Depth of mercy can there be 
   Mercy still reserved for me? 
Can my God His wrath forbear? 
   chief of sinners spare?Me, the  
I have long withstood His grace, 
   Long provoked Him to His face, 
Would not hearken to His calls, 
   Grieved Him by a thousand falls. 
Whence to me this waste of love? 
   Ask my advocate above! 
See the cause in Jesu’s face, 
   Now before the throne of grace. 
The major premise is that, having through Christ’s reconciling death become 
children of God the Father, we shall be saved by the life of the Son of God, 
or better, “in his life.” Note that the relational emphasis of “reconciliation” 
takes over from “justification.” Now that the enemy is a friend or son of the 
once offended living Father; now that he is close at hand through the living 
and interceding Son of God, Heb. 7:25, shall not the friend or son have the 
guarantee  of  ongoing  and  future  salvation  by  means  of  “His  [Son’s]  life”? 
The goodness and consistency of God demands a positive answer. But what 
specifically is this future saving life of Christ? Certainly the sustaining life of 
Christ is indicated here (6:8-11; Gal. 2:20), yet there is also final deliverance 
by resurrection because of “Christ the first fruits” (I Cor. 15:20, 23) that is 
equally  intended  (7:24-25;  8:11,  23,  30);  the  sustaining  aspect  merges  into 
the consummate event.  
The point here is that future tense salvation, that is from now till the day of 
resurrection, is secure for the Christian who is presently an authentic child of 
God. Justification in a present sense is but our commencement (5:1). Thus as 
Murray states, “those who are the beneficiaries of Jesus’ death must also be 
the  beneficiaries  of  all  that  is  entailed  in  his  resurrection  life.”
20
  The 
guarantee of this is the sovereignty of grace (5:21). 
                                            
19
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 172. 
20
  Ibid., p. 175. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  151
c.  We are exultant in God’s reconciliation, v. 11. 
 
Truth  has  consequences,  and  this  is  especially  so  with  regard  to  the  Christian 
gospel. Paul now concludes this section with a description of what ought to be the 
believer’s response to the doctrine he has taught. Here we distinguish between the 
nominal and the regenerate child of God. The former responds to the truth of vs. 
1-10  with  polite  agreement;  the  latter  responds  with  heartfelt  passion,  usually 
evidenced by unstoppable testimony and fervent singing.  
 
(1)  The ground of exultation. 
 
“Exultation” here, kauc£omai, kauchaomai, means to glory or boast, cf. 5:2-
3,  and  obviously  excitement  and  exuberance of  the  soul  are  involved  which 
transcend personality types. However, this enthusiasm is rooted in the truth 
of the gospel and not sensual stimulation for its own sake. “Exultation” is a 
generic  term;  what  matters  is  that  which  stimulates  us  to  jubilation.  Paul 
sums  up  this  gospel  truth  stimulant  as  “the  reconciliation,”  a  significant 
relational term that will find further exposition in vs. 12-21.   
 
(a)  The glorious person of God. 
 
It is by means of the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, the arbitrator from 
heaven,  that  we  are  able  to  exult  in  God.  Thus  to  praise  Christ  is  to 
praise the Father who sent him (John 5:23). 
 
(b)  The saving work of God. 
 
The  key  term  for  Paul  here  is  the  inclusive  expression,  “the 
reconciliation,”  t¾n  katallag»n, te¯n  katallage¯n,  which  in  the  KJV  is 
translated  “the  atonement.”  Shedd  explains:  “At  the  time  when  the 
[KJV]  version  was  made,  atonement  =  at-one-ment,  or  reconciliation. 
The  present  use  of  the  word  makes  it  equivalent  to  expiation  or 
satisfaction.”
21
  The  saving  work  of  Christ,  judicially  bringing  peace 
from the holy God who was formerly hostile toward the sinner, has also 
brought  about  rapprochement,  the  resumption  of  a  harmonious 
relationship with resultant concord. 
It  is  significant  that  the  concept  of  reconciliation  which  Paul  describes 
had  no  place  in  the  Greco-Roman  religions  of  the  first  century.  Colin 
Brown explains: “[I]n general the thought of a personal relationship to 
God  is  far  removed  from  Greek  thought.  .  .  .  This  [subject  of 
reconciliation]  is  the  theological  novelty  in  comparison  with  non-
Christian religious thought, which knows the deity only as the object of 
the  reconciling  work  of  man.”
22
  However  reconciliation  here  is 
distinctively  the  sovereign  grace  of  God  whereby  He  moves  with 
particular  initiative  toward  the  offending  sinner  (II  Cor.  5:18-19)  with 
                                            
21
  Shedd, Romans, p. 119. 
22
  Colin Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology, III, pp. 166-7. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  152 
overtures of peace and love (Rom. 5:1,5). The same point is true today 
with  regard  to  Mohammedanism  which  knows  nothing  of  adoption 
whereby the child of God cries out, “Abba! Father!” (8:14-17). 
When  this  truth  is  experientially  grasped  by  the  pursued  sinner, 
exultation is inevitable, not only by the adopted son of God, but also by 
the Reconciler and the inhabitants of heaven (Luke 15:4-7).    
 
(2)  The character of exultation. 
 
But  how  exactly  do  we  exult  in  God  as  Paul  here  describes?  By  means  of  a 
heart  that  responds  in  adoring  and  grateful  prayer,  by  passionate  testimony 
and  proclamation,  by  spiritual  fruit  that  has  the  savor  of  Christ,  and  by 
singing a new song such as Charles Wesley has taught us:  
Glory be to God on high, 
   And peace on earth descend: 
God comes down, He bows the sky, 
   And shows Himself our Friend: 
God the invisible appears: 
   God, the blest, the great I AM, 
Sojourns in this vale of tears, 
   And Jesus is His name.    
 
 
B.  GOSPEL RECONCILIATION HAS ASSURING ANTITHESES, VS. 12-21. 
 
If Romans 3:21-26, as was earlier claimed, is the most important gospel passage in all of the 
Bible,  yet  it  remains  true  that  in  Romans  5:12-21  we  have  reached  the  reasoned  heart  of 
Paul’s  epistle.  Perhaps  it  is  the  woven  intricacy  of  vs.  12-21  that  has  attracted  so  much 
interest.  Be  that  as  it  may,  more  importantly  the  former  passage  views  the  gospel  with 
narrow  focus,  whereas  these  latter  verses  perceive  the  gospel  as  through  a  wide-angle  lens 
that  provides  a  panorama  of  the  history  of  redemption.  One  other  contrast  concerns  that 
which John Murray mentions; whereas 3:21-26 is individualistic, here we consider opposite 
corporate  entities,  the  solidarity  of  the  seed  of  Adam  versus  the  solidarity  of  the  seed  of 
Christ.
23
  
The concluding emphasis in v. 11 upon “the reconciliation,” and all the gospel doctrine that 
this articular reference assumes, appears to be the connecting element between vs. 1-11 and 
vs. 12-21 in the light of Paul’s “therefore” commencing v. 12. Also consider the absence of 
any  “justification”  language  in  this  section.  In  essence,  reconciliation  involves  two  parties 
that  are  presumed  to  be  in  a  state  of  hostility,  one  being  offended  and  the  other  being  the 
offender; thus they are subsequently united in holy harmony. Hence it is significant that in 
vs. 12-21 there is constant reference to two parties that are in tension because of sin, Adam 
and Christ, that is until through Christ grace sovereignly abounds toward the seed of Adam 
and  reconciliation  is  effected.  This  tension  involving  various  antitheses  is  Paul’s  way  of 
lauding  the  superior  sovereignty  of  grace  in  Christ  by  means  of  a  series  of  a  fortiori 
arguments, v. 21. 
                                            
23
  Murray, Romans, I, pp. 178-9. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  153
The great emphasis given to the person of Adam, eight mentions in vs. 12-21, indicates just 
how vital this personage is to the teaching of Paul, and of course the attending doctrine of 
original sin. Therefore it is no little matter to consider here the fact of Adam’s historicity as 
the original and sole father of the human race. Liberal commentator, C. H. Dodd, responds 
to this problem concerning Romans 5:12 as follows: “Thus Paul’s doctrine of Christ as the 
‘second  Adam’  is  not  so  bound  up  with  the  story  of  the  Fall  as  a  literal  happening  that  it 
ceases to have meaning when we no longer accept the story as such. Indeed, we should not 
too  readily  assume  that  Paul  did  so  accept  it.”
24
  It  is  obvious  that  Dodd’s  critical 
presuppositions  are  in  conflict  with  Scripture,  and  so  much  the  worse  it  becomes  for  the 
Word of God! However, for Paul the former Pharisee it would be unthinkable to conceive of 
anything else other than an historic, biblical Adam. Further, Paul’s argument here concerns 
an historical Christ and requires that his antithesis be historical as well.  
Therefore Lloyd-Jones is correct when he states: 
We  must  assert  that  we  believe  in  the  being  of  one  first  man  Adam,  and  in  one  first  woman 
called Eve. We reject any notion of a pre-Adamic man because it is contrary to the teaching of 
the  Scripture.  .  .  .  [T]hese  early  chapters  of  Genesis  with  their  history  play  a  vital  part  in  the 
whole doctrine of salvation. Take for instance the argument of the Apostle Paul in the Epistle to 
the Romans 5:12-21. Paul’s whole case is based upon that one man Adam and his one sin, and 
the contrast with the other man, the Lord Jesus Christ, and His one great act.”
25
  
Thus  the  importance of  the  creationist  cause becomes  evident  since the  biblical  doctrine of 
sin is inseparably joined to a literal Fall according to Genesis. The American Atheist journal 
acknowledged this when it published the following comment that is essentially true:  
Christianity  has  fought,  still  fights,  and  will  fight  science  to  the  desperate  end  over  evolution, 
because evolution destroys utterly and finally the very reason Jesus’ earthly life was supposedly 
made  necessary.  Destroy  Adam  and  Eve  and  original  sin,  and  in  the  rubble  you  will  find  the 
sorry remains of the Son of God. If Jesus was not the redeemer who died for our sins, and this 
is what evolution means, then Christianity is nothing.
26
 
 
1.  The superiority of reconciliation through Christ over Adam, vs. 12-17. 
 
There  is  common  agreement  that v.  12  is  an incomplete sentence,  that  is  it  presents  a 
protasis without providing the expected apodasis. Such anacolutha are not uncommon 
in  the  intense  style  of  Paul’s  writing,  cf.  9:22-24.
27
  Thus  what  follows  in  vs.  13-17 
                                            
24
  C. H. Dodd, The Epistle Of Paul To The Romans, p. 80. C. K. Barrett makes a similar comment based upon 
liberal  presuppositions:  “It  need  not  be  said  that  Paul,  a  first-century  Jew,  accepted  Gen.  i-iii  as  a 
straightforward narrative of events which really happened.” The Epistle To The Romans, p. 111. Refer also 
to  John  Stott,  The  Message  of  Romans,  pp.  162-6,  where  his  commitment  to  theistic  evolution,  especially 
with the exegetical help of Derek Kidner, leads to a contorted explanation as to how God may possibly have 
taken  over  a  hominid  and  formed  him  into  Adam!  It  is  evident  that  unquestioning  acceptance  of  an 
evolutionary  world  view  and  time  scale  for  human  history  necessitates  the  molding  of  Scripture  to  this 
presupposition. 
25
  D.  M.  Lloyd-Jones,  Knowing  The  Times,  pp.  343-4.  Refer  also  to  Lloyd-Jones’  confrontation  with  an 
ecumenical gathering arranged by the British Council of Churches in 1957-8 when he valiantly stood for the 
historic truth of Romans 5:12. Iain H. Murray, D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, II, pp. 316-318.    
26
  American Atheist, September 1978, p. 30. 
27
  “Hence  a  man  with  the  passion  of  Paul  naturally  breaks  away  from  formal  rules  in  the  structure  of  the 
sentence when he is greatly stirred, as in Gal. and 2 Cor.” A. T. Robertson, A Grammar Of The Greek New 
Testament, p. 435. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  154 
represent a parenthesis with a resumption in v. 18 of the main thought of v. 12. This 
interruption  concerns  the  guilt  of  all  men  as  sinners  from  the  time  of  Adam  beyond 
Moses who have yet lived during differing dispensations and revelations of sin. 
 
a.  Sin reigns through the one man Adam, vs. 12-14. 
 
Again, as in 1:18-3:20, the critical doctrine of sin is considered though here not so 
much as a prelude to an exposition of the gospel as an antithetical contrast with 
the  reigning  superiority  of  grace.  Nevertheless,  the  perspective  here  of  universal 
inherited  sin  and  consequent  universal  death  presents  a  horrendous  scenario. 
Luther graphically describes it as follows:  
[T]his  original  sin  is  the  very  tinder  of  sin,  the  law  of  the  flesh,  the  law  of  the 
members, the weakness of our nature, the tyrant, the original sickness, etc. For it is 
like  a  sick  man  whose  mortal  illness  is  not  only  the  loss  of  health  of  one  of  his 
members,  but  it  is,  in  addition  to  the  lack  of  health  in  all  of  his  members,  the 
weakness  of  all  of  his  senses  and  powers,  culminating  even  in his  disdain  for  those 
things  which  are  healthful  and  in  his  desire  for  those  things  which  make  him  sick. 
Thus  this  is  Hydra,  a  many-headed  and  most  tenacious  monster,  with  which  we 
struggle  in  the  Lernean  Swamp  of  this  life  till  the  very  day  of  our  death.  It  is 
Cerberus,  that  irrepressible  barker,  and  Antaeus,  who  cannot  be  overcome  while 
loose here on earth.
28
 
 
(1)  All sinned in Adam, v. 12. 
 
The  following  diagram  indicates  the  three  main  propositions  of  this  verse 
that are logically related and present a circular argument. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
28
  Martin  Luther,  Lectures  On  Romans,  p.  300.  Footnotes  14-16  explain  that:  “In  Greek  mythology  [Hydra 
was] a monster that inhabited the swamps of Lerna in the Peloponnesus. When one of its nine heads was cut 
off,  it  was  immediately  replaced  by  two  new  ones,  unless  cauterized.  Hercules  slew  this  dragon.  [Cerberus 
was]  [t]he  surly,  three-headed  dog  that  guarded  the  gates  to  Hades.  In  his  most  difficult  ‘twelfth  labor’ 
Hercules subdued this formidable beast. . . . [Antaeus was] [t]he giant whose strength was constantly renewed 
so long as he remained in contact with his mother, Earth. Hercules crushed him while holding him aloft.”   
   Sin entered the world  — through one man 
   Death entered the world  — through sin
   Death spread to all men   — because all sinned 
(as a consequence)
(as a consequence)
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  155
(a)  Sin entered the world through one man. 
 
We  focus  on  Genesis  3  where  sin  had  its  entrance,  as  distinct  from  its 
origin, into the human race at a point of time in history, aorist here of 
e„sšrcomai,  eiserchomai.  “Sin,”  always  in  the  singular  in  this  chapter, 
along  with  “the  transgression,”  describes  that  state  of  pollution 
resulting  from  Adam’s  original  act  of  sin;  it  is  an  invasive  cancer 
contracted  by  serpentine  infection,  a  principle  of  thorough  sinful 
contamination involving the totality of Adam’s being and faculties. 
 
(b)  Death entered the world through sin. 
 
It seems understood that death similarly entered into human history at a 
point  of  time  following  after  Adam’s  sin.  This  second  assertion  is  also 
plain biblical truth upon which Paul is building his case; but up to this 
point we have been exclusively dealing with Adam. This death of Adam, 
at the age of 930 years, involved both separation from fellowship with 
God  in  innocence  enjoyed  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  as  well  as  separation 
from  life.  Of  course  the  lurking  question  that  immediately  follows 
concerns the obvious fact that yet everyone in the human race dies? So 
why then is death universal?  
 
(c)  Death spread to all men because all sinned. 
 
Now  Paul  declares  that  because  the  one  man  Adam  died,  it  was  an 
inexorable  result  that  all  of  mankind  should  die.  Because  of  Adam, 
death “spread  to  all  men,”  distributed  itself  like  a  plague,  a  congenital 
disease.  Hence  universal  death  finds  its  cause  in  the  original  human 
death.  But  why  is  this  connection  so  inevitable?  The  final  clause 
becomes  the  linchpin  of  the  whole  argument;  all  of  mankind  is  locked 
up to death, “because all sinned.” 
Logic suggests a connection between Adam’s original sin and death, and 
humankind’s  resultant  death;  that  is,  man  dies  universally  because  he 
contracted  sin  from  Adam.  But  the  aorist  of  ¡mart£nw,  hamatano¯ ,  cf. 
the aorist of 3:23, along with the teaching of vs. 18-19 give more solid 
evidence  for  the  belief  that  the  human  race  inherited  sin  from  Adam, 
that is, “all sinned in, through, and with Adam.” 
However,  while  the  inheritance  of  sin  from  Adam  is  clear  Pauline 
teaching,  yet  the  means  of  that  inheritance  in  Calvinistic  Protestantism 
has  fallen  into  two  camps.  Charles  Hodge  and  John  Murray  represent 
the  “federal,”  corporate,  covenantal  understanding  of  imputation, 
which  point  is  upheld  in  vs.  15-21.  Augustine  and  William  Shedd 
represent  the  “realistic,”  seminal  understanding  of  imputation.  Lloyd-
Jones  claims  both  aspects  are  essentially  true,  and  he  is  especially 
influenced  by  the  biblical  force  of  Hebrews  7:9-10,  ignored  by  Hodge, 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  156 
where  Levi  is  said  to  have  offered  tithes,  being  in  the  loins  of 
Abraham.
29
  
 
(d)  An objection is considered. Hence Lloyd-Jones rightly concludes:  
What  is  clear  then  is  this,  that  Paul  is  saying  here  quite  plainly  that  all 
sinned  in  Adam,  and  that  all  are  guilty  before  God  on  account  of  that 
one sin of Adam when he deliberately transgressed God’s commandment. 
God  has  imputed  to  the  whole  of  the  human  race,  including  ourselves, 
that one sin of Adam. Adam sinned and we all sinned. This is an essential 
part of the doctrine of Original Sin.”
30
  
“But,”  responds  the  objector,  “such  a  condition  is  unfairly  imposed 
upon mankind since we had no opportunity to resist the serpent’s sinful 
overture.”  Augustus  Strong  and  Jonathan  Edwards  respond  to  this 
matter  in  detail.
31
  In  support  of  Edwards,  Shedd  explains  that  a  man, 
infected  with  sin,  is  justly  and  responsibly  sinful  when  he  assents  and 
agrees  to  a  sinful  act.  In  other  words,  when  a  child  of  Adam  sins,  he 
does  not  sin  reluctantly,  but  approves  of  what  he  does.  The  love  of  a 
parent  for  his  child  is  good,  admirable,  and  responsible,  but  it  stems 
from original nature that approves of the child. So the sinner acts from 
original nature and yet is to be justly condemned for that which he does 
by nature and approves.
32
  
 
(e)  By  way  of  application,  the  practical  ramifications  of  the  doctrine  of 
Original  Sin,  and  its  rejection,  are  profound.  A  modern  representation 
of  this  problem  of  human  nature  is  portrayed  in  William  Golding’s 
novel Lord of the Flies, in which a group of schoolboys, abandoned on 
a deserted island, degenerate rather than improve over the years of their 
confinement. Consider the following realms of life. 
 
1)  Government.  Law  and  order  are  established  either  to  restrain 
man’s  evil  tendency  and  grant  freedom  to  do  the  good,  or  to 
engineer man, he being essentially neutral in morality. The former 
course stems from biblical revelation. The latter course stems from 
materialistic, evolutionary humanism. Inherent in law enforcement 
here will be an understanding of morality that is either objective or 
relative. 
 
2)  Family  life.  Parents,  knowing  themselves  to  be  sinners,  raise  their 
children  on  the  premise  of  their  like  tendency  to  sin,  and  the 
exhortation of the righteous God. Alternatively, the little innocents 
simply need exposure to the right social environment. Thus parents 
                                            
29
  Lloyd-Jones,  Romans  5,  pp.  213-219.  Cf.  John  Murray,  The  Imputation  Of  Adam’s  Sin,  and  the  opposing 
view of William G. T. Shedd, II, Dogmatic Theology, pp. 59-63. 
30
  Ibid., pp. 218-9. 
31
  Augustus Strong, Systematic Theology, pp. 629-37; Jonathan Edwards, The Works of Jonathan Edwards, I, 
pp. 216-33.  
32
  Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, II, pp. 168-257.  
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  157
themselves,  being  inexperienced,  need  guidance  from  more 
knowledgeable government that denies Original Sin. 
 
3)  Education. Shall the teacher assume a flowering sinful nature that 
needs  to  be  educated  in  biblical  righteousness,  or  an  environ-
mentally  conditionable  nature  that  needs  to  be  educated  in  a 
secular  world-view?  Shall  the  teacher  assume  that  pupils  have  a 
spiritual  soul  that  is  first  accountable  to  God,  or  a  body  of  flesh 
that is only different from the animal world in its complexity?  
 
4)  Religious life. Original Sin requires revelation and church life that, 
by  means  of  redemption  and  sanctification,  effect  change  in  a 
man’s  corrupt  soul.  Worship  will  focus  on  grace.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  fundamentally  neutral  human  being  at  birth  needs 
platitudinous nurture that encourages the pursuit of perfectability, 
with  the  cooperation  of  either  God  or  man.  In  this  vein,  worship 
will offer a degree of human worthiness.  
 
(2)  All sinned from Adam, vs. 13-14. 
 
The  concluding  expression  of  v.  12,  “all  sinned,”  appears  to  trigger  in  Paul 
an  anticipation  that  the  readers  of  his  epistle  are  well  aware  of  Old 
Testament history, especially the distinctive epochs separated by the giving of 
the  law  to  Moses  at  Mt.  Sinai.  Hence  a  parenthetical  explanation  is 
considered necessary.  
 
(a)  From Adam to Moses, like Adam, v. 13. 
 
It  seems  basic  to  Paul’s  argument  here  that  the  codified  law  given  to 
Moses was a distinctive revelation of the righteousness of God provided 
for  Israel,  and  not  a  continuation  from  creation.  Otherwise  the 
discussion here would be quite unnecessary. On the other hand, the fact 
that the Mosaic covenant was a new revelation raises the question as to 
the character of the pre-Mosaic revelation of God’s moral demands. 
`The  logic here  leads  to  an  inescapable  conclusion. We  know  that sin  is 
not  chargeable  if  definitions  and  sanctions  against  sin  have  not  been 
promulgated. For a man to be punished he must have known about the 
terms  of  his  transgression.  Therefore  it  follows  that  since  death,  as  a 
punishment  for  sin,  had  universally  reigned  over  man  from  Adam  to 
Moses,  it  must  be  concluded  that  this  first  dispensation  knew  of  a 
revelation of God’s righteousness. Consider God’s judgment on Noah’s 
generation  as  well  as  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob were all explicit sinners. 
`What specifically was this pre-Mosaic revelation of God’s righteousness 
that  was  not  identical  with  the  Mosaic  code?  As  Shedd  puts  it: 
“Although  the  decalogue  was  not  yet  promulgated,  there  must, 
nevertheless,  have  been  some  law  of  some  kind  against  which  p£ntej 
¼marton,  pantes  h¯ emarton,  [all  sinned];  otherwise  sin  could  not  have 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  158 
been charged to them.”
33
 The most common belief here is that this pre-
Mosaic  law  was  a  revelation  engraved  on  the  conscience,  2:12-16, 
though  in  view  of  the  numerous  appearances  of  God  in  the  form  of  a 
theophany during  that period,  a more  concrete  revelation  ought  not to 
be excluded.   
 
(b)  From Adam to Moses, unlike Adam, v. 14. 
 
As  sin  became  a  universal  inheritance  as  a  consequence  of  Adam’s  sin, 
so  it  became  inevitable  that  universal  death  would  follow  on  from 
Adam’s  death  to  the  generation  of  Moses.  And  this  epidemic  of  death 
was in spite of the fact that not all, “sinned in the likeness of the offense 
[disobedient  act]  of  Adam.”  The  suggestion  of  some  that  Paul  here 
refers  to  children  and  the  mentally  infirm  who  sin  through  Adam  yet 
not  against  law,  though  upheld  by  Augustine,  Owen,  Edwards,  Shedd, 
Haldane and Murray, seems unlikely. Rather, none of Adam’s progeny 
sinned  after  the  distinctive  manner  of  their  innocent  father,  especially 
with regard to eating fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil (Gen. 3:1-5, cf. v. 22-24).
34
 
However,  the  distinctive  nature  of  Adam’s  sin  ought  not  to  lead  us  to 
believe that there is no connection between Adam’s fall and, “Him who 
was  to  come.”  Rather,  Adam  was  a  “type  [pattern,  representation],” 
tÚpoj, tupos, of the promised Christ, for “as in Adam all die, so also in 
Christ all will be made alive” (I Cor. 15:22). John Owen comments on 
this verse: “Adam being the figure of Christ, look how it was with him, 
with  respect  unto  his  natural  posterity,  as  unto  sin  and  death;  so  it  is 
with the Lord Christ, the second Adam, and his spiritual posterity, with 
respect unto righteousness and life.”
35
As John Henry Newman wrote: 
O loving wisdom of our God! 
   When all was sin and shame, 
A second Adam to the fight 
   And to the rescue came. 
O wisest love! That flesh and blood 
   Which did in Adam fail, 
Should strive afresh against the foe, 
   Should strive and should prevail. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
33
  Shedd, Romans, p. 131. 
34
  John  MacArthur  writes:  “Because  Adam  and  Eve  were  evicted  from  the  Garden  of  Eden  after  they  sinned, 
they  had  no  more  opportunity  to  disobey  God’s  single  prohibition.  They  no  longer  had  access  to  the 
forbidden  fruit  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  nor  have  any  of  their  descendants. 
Consequently, it has been inpossible for any human being, either before or after Moses, to have “sinned in the 
likeness of the offense of Adam.” New Testament Commentary, Romans 1-8, p. 299. 
35
  John Owen, The Works of John Owen, V, p. 326.  
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  159
b.  Grace reigns through the one man Christ, vs. 15-17. 
 
`The similarity/fulfilment relationship between Adam and Christ just mentioned at 
the end of v. 14 prompts Paul to immediately counter with a number of antitheses 
that  describe  the  dissimilarity  between  the  defiler  of  the  human  race  and  its 
Redeemer. These contrasts are diagramed as follows. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
`Here  two  generals,  two  representatives  of  the  human  race,  are  juxtapositioned. 
There  is  Adam,  the  captive  underling  of  the  strong  man  Satan  (Mark  3:27), 
through  whom  the  universe  has  been  captured  and  thoroughly  polluted.  To  use 
John  Bunyan’s  imagery  found  in  The  Holy  War,  Diabolus  has  taken  captive  the 
City  of  Mansoul.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  the  stronger  man  Christ  who 
recaptures  the  universe  and  cleanses  it.  At  the  direction  of  King  Shaddai,  Prince 
Immanuel assails Diabolus and recaptures the City of Mansoul. 
It should also be noted that the three antitheses presented here become the ground 
upon which Paul makes his climactic declaration in vs. 18-21.  
 
(1)  Grace reigns over transgression, v. 15. 
 
A strong contrast, ¢ll£, alla, is made here between the universal affliction of 
death  that  Adam’s  transgression  generated  upon  “the  many,”  and  the 
universal  bestowal  of  free  grace  upon  “the  many.”  Note  that  in  v.  18  the 
contrast  involves  “all  men,”  while  in  v.  19  it  is  again  “the  many.”  Not 
surprisingly,  those  commentators  who  have  a  doctrinal  proclivity  toward 
liberalism and neo-orthodoxy also tilt here toward universalism, the ultimate 
salvation  of  all  men.
36
  However,  refer  to  those  references  in  Romans  that 
declare  the  final  condemnation  of  the  objects  of  God’s  wrath,  such  as  in 
1:24-32; 2:3-5; 9:18as well as the forthright response of John Murray to Karl 
Barth in this regard.
37
 
                                            
36
  These include Barrett, Barth, and Cranfield.  
37
  He  first  makes  it  clear  that  Barth  does  not  believe  in  an  original  historic  Adam  who  commenced  human 
history.  Then  he  comments:  “[I]f  there  is  distributive  universalism  in  the  apodoses  of  verses  18  and  19,  as 
Barth’s  interpretation  demands,  there  must  also  be  in  the  apodosis  of  v.  21,  and  the  reign  of  grace  through 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life  must  embrace  all  men  without  exception.  This  is  not  Paul’s  teaching  (cf.  II 
Thess.  1:9;  2:10-14)  and  to  maintain  that  the  universalistic  terms  of  Rom.  5:18b  demand  the  ultimate 
salvation  of  all  is  to  fail  to  apply  to  this  text  the  canons  of  exegesis  which  obviously  obtain  in  the 
interpretation of numberless universalistic expressions.” Murray, Romans, I, pp. 387-8.  
                ADAM                  CHRIST 
  v. 15       transgression           gift of grace 
  v. 16      condemnation          justification 
  v. 17             death                       life
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  160 
Moo  gives  the  probable  meaning  when  he  writes:  “[I]n  each  case,  Paul’s 
point  is  not  so  much  that  the  groups  affected  by  Christ  and  Adam, 
respectively, are coextensive, but that Christ affects those who are his just as 
certainly  as  Adam  does  those  who  are  his.  .  .  .  1:16-4:25  makes  it  equally 
clear  that  only  certain  people  derive  the  benefits  from  Christ’s  act  of 
righteousness.”
38
 
 
(a)  The one man Adam = transgression of the many. 
 
“The  transgression  (contraction  of  sin?),”  par£ptwma,  parapto¯ ma,  cf. 
17, 18, 20, that is “sin (infection of sin?)” ¡mart…a, hamartia, cf. v.20, 
is  Adam’s  incendiary  act  that  results  in  the  ashes  of  death,  even  the 
ravaging of the whole human race. This tragedy might be likened to one 
infected immigrant entering a country who inevitably infects the whole 
populace  with  his  disease.  But  here,  in  the  realm  of  human  sin,  the 
plague is infinitely worse as are its devastating consequences.   
 
(b)  The one man Christ = gift of grace to the many.   
 
However “the free gift,” tÕ c£risma to charisma, Christ as a complete 
Savior,  is  the  gloriously  transcendent,  “much  more  .  .  .  grace  of  God” 
antithesis  that  freely  provides,  “a  garland  instead  of  ashes,  the  oil  of 
gladness instead of mourning, the mantle of praise instead of the spirit 
of fainting” (Isa. 61:3).This gospel is about “the one man Jesus Christ,” 
who may be likened to an immigrant who brings with him a life-giving 
pharmaceutical  patent  that  becomes  a  health-giving  blessing  to  the 
whole populace. Isaac Watts describes Christ as God’s great apodosis as 
follows: 
Adam the sinner: at his fall, 
   Death like a conqueror seized us all; 
A thousand new-born babes are dead 
   By fatal union to their head.  
We sing thine everlasting Son, 
   Who joined our nature to his own: 
Adam the second from the dust 
   Raises the ruins of the first.  
(2)  Justification reigns over judgment, v. 16. 
 
There  is  both  repetition  and  progression  in  this  further  consideration  of  the 
antithesis introduced in v. 15, while a climactic conclusion is to follow in v. 
17. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
38
  Moo, Romans, pp. 343-4. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  161
(a)  The one man Adam = condemnation. 
 
The  singular  sin  of  Adam  warranted  judgment  and  the  verdict  of  his 
condemnation.  However,  in  parallel  with  v.  15,  the  participation  of 
“the  many”  in  Adam’s  sin  brought  about  their  condemnation  as  well. 
Thus  the  whole  human  race,  on  account  of  Adam,  is  legally,  judicially 
condemned  to  death,  and  humanly  speaking  without  hope.  This 
sentence of death is portrayed as a horrifying pall that is the downside 
upon which the gospel of free grace is predicated.  
 
(b)  The one man Christ = justification. 
 
Adam as the facilitator of condemnation now recedes in contrast, that is 
the  logical  thought  of  his  reception  to  begin  with  of  particular  grace. 
Rather,  “the  free  gift  arose  from  many  transgressions  resulting  in 
justification  [of  the  many  who  by  faith  have  believed  in  Christ].”  In 
other  words,  the  grace  of  God  so  generously  responded  to  the 
universality of the human predicament, and not merely Adam. Murray 
comments:  What  the  judgment  unto  condemnation  took  into  account 
was simply the one trespass; . . . But the free gift unto justification is of 
such  a  character  that  it  must  take  the  many  trespasses  into  its 
reckoning;  .  .  .  In  this  way  we  can  perceive  the  identity  which  the 
apostle  has  in  view  and  we  can  see  how  the  magnitude  of  grace  is 
exhibited by the manifold trespasses with which grace reckons.” 
The  climax  of  this  verse,  namely  the  fact  that  “the  free  gift  results  in 
justification,”  not  only  confirms  the  sola  fide  character  of  the  gospel, 
but also how Paul exalts in the forensic nature of “the reconciliation,” 
v. 11. 
 
(3)  Life reigns over death, v. 17. 
 
If  the  contrast  has  been  established  in  vs.  15-16,  here  it  takes  on  a  greater 
vividness and luster that all the more enhances the glory of the sovereignty of 
grace,  especially  as  it  relates  to  the  recipient  of  such  abundance.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  as  with  vs.  15-16,  so  here  both  c£rij,  charis,  “grace  gift,” 
and  dwre£,  do¯ rea,  “free  gift,”  are  closely  connected.  Moo  suggests  that, 
“‘grace’ denotes the motive or manner in which God works, while ‘the gift’ is 
the  specific  manifestation  of  this  grace  —  the  righteous  grace  and  life 
conferred on ‘the many.’”
39
 
 
(a)  The one man Adam = death. 
 
The  negative  proposition  is  sober  in  the  extreme,  depressingly  and 
despairingly so. It portrays a holocaust, a paralyzing scourge effected by 
one individual. Death has come to the whole human race through Adam 
with  the  result  that  it  has  established  terrifying,  tyrannical  dominion. 
                                            
39
  Ibid., p. 335n. Cf. Shedd, Romans, p. 136.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  162 
Lloyd-Jones writes: “The world is a place of cemeteries; it is a place of 
death and gloom and end.”
40
  
 
(b)  The one man Christ = life. 
 
While  the  torment  of  death  has  been  the  underlying  human  affliction 
introduced  in  v.  12  that  has  continued  through  to  v.  21,  in  v.  10,  but 
more particularly here in v. 17 the essential antithesis of “life” is upheld 
that reaches a climax as “eternal life” in v. 21. Cf. also 6:4, 11, 23; 8:2, 
6,  10-11,  13.  It  is  the  “one  Jesus  Christ”  who  mediates  the  superior 
“much  more”  blessings  of  grace  that  are  so  transcendently  glorious 
when  compared  with  the  “one  Adam’s”  fearful  legacy.  These  benefits 
include: 
 
1)  The abundance of grace. 
 
Specifically  this  is  gospel  grace,  as  the  qualifying  “gift  of 
righteousness” indicates. John Bunyan describes it thus:  
Thou  Son  of  the  Blessed,  what  grace  was  manifest  in  thy 
condescension!  Grace  brought  thee  down  from  heaven,  grace 
stripped  thee  of  thy  glory,  grace  made  thee  poor  and  despicable, 
grace made thee bear such burdens of sin, such burdens of sorrow, 
such  burdens  of  God’s  curse  as  are  unspeakable.  O  Son  of  God! 
grace was in all thy tears, grace came bubbling out of thy side with 
thy  blood,  grace  came  forth  with  every  word  of  thy  sweet  mouth. 
Grace  came  out  where  the  whip  smote  thee,  where  the  thorns 
pricked thee, where the nails and spear pierced thee. O blessed Son 
of  God!  Here  is  grace  indeed!  Unsearchable  riches  of  grace! 
Unthought-of riches of grace! Grace to make angels wonder, grace 
to  make  sinners  happy,  grace  to  astonish  devils.  And  what  will 
become of them that trample under foot this Son of God.
41
  
 
2)  The gift of righteousness. 
 
Here  “the  abundance  of  grace”  is  specified  as  “the  gift  of 
righteousness,”  which  is  reminiscent  of  1:17;  3:22-23;  Phil.  3:9; 
and  vs.  15-16.  Therefore  it  is  the  righteousness  which  comes 
through faith alone, the righteousness which justifies, the objective 
imputed  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  is  the 
believing sinners covering according to Isaiah 61:10. 
 
3)  The reign in life. 
 
The  future  result  will  be  the  “reign  in  life,”  since  the  justified 
sinner  will  also  have  been  regenerated;  his  dead  soul  shall  have 
been  transplanted  with  a  heart  of  flesh.  Thus  the  “reign  in  life” 
                                            
40
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 5, p. 261. 
41
  Bunyan, Works, I, p. 346. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  163
here contrasts with the earlier declaration in this verse that “death 
reigned.” While the future tense aspect of basileÚw, basileuo¯ , may 
anticipate  the  believer’s  reigning  participation  in  the  new  order 
established at Christ’s second coming (Matt. 19:28; I Cor. 6:3), yet 
more  likely  it  describes  the  future  newness  of  life  that  follows 
conversion.  In  support  of  this  priority  consider  6:9-14,  and 
especially  v.  12  where  basileÚw,  basileuo¯ ,  is  used,  as  here,  with 
obvious related meaning. 
What then is it for the Christian to presently “reign in life through 
the  One,  Jesus  Christ”?  To  begin  with  it  is  for  the  believer  to 
recognize the singular reign of grace in his life, that is embodied in 
Jesus Christ, this being a supplanting of the former reign of death 
through  sin  by  means  of  Adam.  Therefore,  6:12  declares  that  the 
former tyrant is not to be heeded when he knocks seeking to gain 
entrance.  According  to  6:11,  the  child  of  God  is  to  acknowledge 
that he is dead to Adam’s corporate administration and overtures, 
and “alive unto God in Christ Jesus.” This newness of life 8:2, 10, 
in  spite  of  the  condemned  body  of  flesh,  is  variously  described  in 
the New Testament (II Cor. 3:6; Gal. 5:25; Eph. 2:5-6; Col. 3:3; II 
Tim. 1:1). Thus the regenerate soul lives his present life, not under 
the dominion of sin and death, but as regnant, prevailing in life by 
the  life  of  God  that  has  made  him  alive.  Therefore  in  6:17-18, 
Christians, formerly “slaves of sin, . . . having been freed from sin 
[and death, through life become] slaves of righteousness.”  
So Lloyd-Jones describes what “reigning in life” means: 
We  have  lost  the  fear  of  death,  we  are  no  longer  under  the 
dominion of sin, we are no longer under the dominion of the devil, 
we  can  resist  him  and  make  him  flee.  Indeed,  we  are  no  longer 
under  the  tyranny  of  life  itself.  .  .  .  Paul  is  reigning  in  life.  He  has 
mastered  sin,  Satan,  life,  death,  everything;  he  is  more  than 
conqueror. This is true of us already in the present.
42
 
 
2.  The superiority of grace over sin, vs. 18-21. 
 
It is commonly understood that here, on account of Paul’s use of two conjunctions that 
combine to draw a strong inference concerning the past, we return to the continuance 
of  the  interrupted  thought  of  v.  12,  though  with  a  cumulative  effect.  In  other  words, 
related  issues  concerning  the  main  antithesis  between  Adam  and  Christ  having  been 
dealt with, a finale concerning the triumph of grace is played with the full orchestration 
of  the  Apostle’s  divinely  inspired  ability.  Variations  on  the  theme  having  been  played 
out, now the final movement breaks forth.  
With regard to emphasis, most of the key words that represent the doctrine of Romans 
thus far are mentioned in these verses, namely sin, transgression, condemnation, death, 
law,  righteousness,  justification,  grace,  and  life,  and  these  are  all  embodied  in  “the 
                                            
42
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 5, p. 264. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  164 
reconciliation” described in v. 11. Yet it is “justification, grace, life” which exultantly 
sit at the apex of Paul’s argument.   
 
a.  In man’s status before God, v. 18. 
 
The absence of any verb in this sentence, which most translations supply, such as 
“resulted” NASB, may suggest Paul’s exclamatory enthusiasm at this point. At the 
same time, we have two parallel statements here that are virtually identical in their 
grammatical  arrangement.  The  particular  emphasis  concerns  man’s  standing 
before God, either condemnation or justification.  
 
(1)  Sin brings universal condemnation. 
 
The  repetition  here  is  a  reflection  of  Paul’s  pastoral  heart.  For  him  the 
doctrine  of  original  sin  is  of  the  utmost  importance  since  it  is  really  the 
foundation  of  the  gospel’s  universal  significance.  Further,  it  enhances  our 
appreciation  of  the  sovereignty  of  grace.  The  bad  news  here  is  that  on 
account  of  Adam’s  one  sin,  the  whole  human  race  falls  under  God’s 
encompassing condemnation.  
 
(2)  Grace brings universal justification. 
 
The  “one  act  of  righteousness”  could  be  more  literally  translated  the  “one 
[act  of]  justification,”  and  Paul’s  intent  is  to  contrast  this  glorious  and 
incomparably  greater  work  of  grace  with  Adam’s  shameful  act  of 
disobedience that resulted in condemnation. The atonement of the Lord Jesus 
Christ is a singular, unrepeatable, saving event (Heb. 10:10, 14), the benefits 
of which are obtained through faith alone.  
Furthermore, this justification is “of life to all men,” or better, “justification 
resulting  in  life  for  all  men.”  Here  “justification”  and  “regeneration”  are 
indivisibly  related.  The  true  child  of  God  will  be  both  right  with  God  and 
alive unto God.  
However, the universality here, described as “all men,” incorporates all and 
only  those  who  are  of  saving  faith  and  the  objects  of  Christ’s  designed 
efficacy,  not  “all  men”  in  totality.  Murray  makes  a  telling  argument  here 
with reference to I Corinthians 15:22 where Paul similarly writes: “For as in 
Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.” “As the context will 
demonstrate  the  apostle  is  here  dealing  with  the  resurrection  to  life,  with 
those  who  are  Christ’s  and  will  be  raised  at  his  coming.  The  ‘all’  of  the 
second clause is therefore restrictive in a way that the ‘all’ in the first clause 
is not..”
43
  
 
b.  In man’s state of being, v. 19. 
 
Once again, the close grammatical parallelism is maintained. However the change 
of  emphasis  concerns  a  return  to  the  cause  of  man’s  condemnation  and 
                                            
43
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 203. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  165
justification as described in v. 18, that is original sin through Adam and original 
grace through Christ.  
 
(1)  Sin constitutes many sinners. 
 
Through Adam’s initial act of “disobedience,” parako», parakoe¯, his refusal 
to  heed  what  God  had  commanded  (as  distinct  from  “transgression”  in  vs. 
15-18),  “the  many,”  not  “many,”  were  “made,”  kaq…sthmi,  kathiste¯mi,  or 
better,  classified  by  declaration  and  constituted  as  sinners.  But  what  more 
precisely  does  this  mean?  Did  the  race  issuing  from  Adam’s  loins  become 
diseased without agreed participation? If so, how is it possible for man to be 
guilty as charged? Refer back to the consideration of this matter in v. 12. 
Obviously Adam’s progeny was not consulted concerning its father’s original 
sin; nor was it consulted in terms of it coming into being. However, as there 
is  responsibility  incumbent  upon those  who  have  unsolicited  being,  so  there 
is  responsibility  incumbent  upon  those  who  inherit  Adam’s  sin.  As  man 
accepts his being in preference to nonbeing, so he accepts his nature and thus 
is accountable in his agreeable acceptance of it.  
Here man is classified according to his parentage; man is what he is because 
of  his  filial  roots  and  ethnicity;  he  is  racially  adamic  and  he  agrees  with  his 
parental  traits.  However,  whereas  we  are  her  considering  man’s 
identification with Adam, in v. 12 it was man’s participation with Adam that 
was emphasized. Yet here, surely identification plainly suggests participation.  
 
(2)  Grace constitutes many righteous. 
 
The  parallelism  at  this  point  seems  most  intentional  and  it  is  packed  with 
transcendent  gospel  truth.  So  through  “the  obedience  of  the  One,”  that  is 
Jesus  Christ,  “the  many,”  or  those  under  Christ’s  saving  panoply  through 
faith,  are  “made  righteous,”  again  kaq…sthmi,  kathiste¯mi,  or  classified  by 
declaration and constituted as righteous. 
The  first  contrast  here  concerns  Adam’s  “disobedience”  and  Christ’s 
“obedience.”  As  Adam  refused  to  heed  the  will  of  God,  so  the  Son  of  God 
declared, “My food is to do the will of Him [the Father] who sent Me and to 
do  His  work”  (John  4:34;  cf.  Heb.  10:7).  Hence  the  active  obedience  of 
Christ,  his  earthly  conformity  to  the  Father’s  will,  qualified  him  as  the  One 
who offered passive obedience in his atonement. 
The  second  contrast  here  concerns  the  seed  of  Adam  being  constituted 
“sinners”  and  the  seed  of  Christ  being  constituted  “righteous.”  Here  the 
larger preceding context of Romans, especially from v. 12 onward, demands 
that  as  man  has  participated  in  the  disobedience  and  unrighteousness  of 
Adam,  through  inheritance  and  imputation,  so  the  believing  sinner 
participates in the saving obedience and righteousness of Christ by means of 
imputation and donation, cf. v. 17, through faith alone.
44
  
                                            
44
  Cf. Hodge, Romans, pp. 173-6; Murray, Romans, I, pp. 203-6; Shedd, Romans, pp. 139-42. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  166 
Thus  as  the  human  condition,  its  inescapable  tyranny,  its  universality,  does 
engender  despair,  hopelessness,  yet  Paul  would  stimulate  hope  in  a  most 
logical  manner.  Consider  that  the  problem  started  with  one  man;  is  it  true 
that  Adam  originated  the  disease?  Yes,  the  evidence  of  Scripture  and 
experience  is  overwhelming.  Then  also  consider  the  good  news  that  the 
remedy originates with one man, the qualified Son of God. Therefore, to coin 
the  thought  of  I  John  4:4,  “You  have  overcome  your  inheritance  in  Adam 
because greater is your adopted Second Adam, he that is for you and in you, 
than your father in the flesh, he that is in the world.”  
 
c.  In man’s reckoning with law, vs. 20-21. 
 
Ever  mindful  of  the  Jew  who  sees  the  law  looming  between  Adam  and  Christ, 
Paul  returns  to  Mt.  Sinai  since,  in  view  of  v.  19,  it  is  the  right  moment  to  deal 
with the ordained function of the law. This resolution will see Mt. Sinai as being 
complementary to gospel proclamation in Christ rather than in conflict. The law, 
rightly  understood,  only  enhances  the  antitheses  of  condemnation  and 
justification, sin and righteousness.    
 
(1)  Law is confronted with grace, v. 20. 
 
“Law”  here,  without  the  article,  surely  refers  to  that  “entering  in”  of  the 
Mosaic administration of God’s righteousness as revealed in the Pentateuch. 
 
(a)  Law stimulates sin. 
 
The Law “entered in,” pareisšrcomai, pareiserchomai, that is it “made 
its entrance alongside,” though not in the sense that it merely crept in, 
so to speak. Rather it entered in the course of Israel’s redemptive history 
so  that  “the  transgression  would  increase,”  cf.  4:15;  7:13;  Gal.  3:19. 
According  to  God’s  design,  the  Law  was  given  to  God’s  redeemed 
people  so  that  they  might  become  sensitive  about  the  reality  of  their 
ongoing  sinfulness.  The  remedy  for  such  a  revelation  was  found  in  the 
ordained sacrificial system. 
More  specifically,  the  Law  was  intended  to  bring  focus  on  the  gulf 
between  the  demands  of  God’s  perfect  righteousness  and  man’s 
universal  unrighteousness  in  Adam;  the  purpose  of  the  Law  was  as 
God’s  x-ray  machine  that  reveals  the  depth  and  pervasiveness  of 
corruption,  “the  transgression,”  that  is  all  too  easily  hidden;  while  the 
Law is intentionally diagnostic, in no way is it remedial.   
 
(b)  Grace abounds over sin.  
 
As the antitheses here indicate, Law and Grace are to be understood in 
a  related  manner  rather  than  as  separate  entities.  God’s  desire  to 
manifest grace requires that it be predicated upon a confrontation with 
the reality of sin in all  of its hideous breadth and depth. Thus, as “the 
sin  increased,”  pleon£zw,  pleonazo¯ ,  so  “the  grace  abounded  all  the 
more,” ØperperisseÚw, huperperisseuo¯ . The history of Israel forcefully 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  167
illustrates  this  truth,  that  is  the  abundance  of  God’s  grace  that  always 
dominates in the face of repeated disobedience (Neh. 9:5-31; Hos. 11:1-
11).  The  emphasis  here  must  not  be  thought  of  merely  quantitatively 
but rather dynamically, even as v. 21 will emphasize. The thought that 
grace  could  super-abound  only  to  be  once  again  defeated  by  sin  is 
unthinkable in the context here. Rather grace reigns over a foe that has 
been defeated once and for all. As John Kent has written: 
Join thou my soul, for thou canst tell 
   How grace divine broke up thy cell, 
And loosed thy native chains; 
   And still, from that auspicious day, 
How oft art thou constrained to say, 
   That grace triumphant reigns. 
 
(2)  Death is confronted with life, v. 21. 
 
Here  the  dynamic  introduced  in  v.  20  is  played  out  in  full  force  since  the 
thought  that  “grace  abounded  all  the  more”  now  becomes  that  of  “grace 
reigning” in victorious power. Lloyd-Jones declares that here Paul, “puts the 
whole  of  the  Gospel  in  one  big,  thrilling  statement.,”
45
  and  not  surprisingly 
he devotes four sermons to his exposition of this one verse.   
 
(a)  Sin reigns in death. 
 
Here the power of sin is portrayed with such despotic force that it takes 
on  personal  meaning,  as  if  it  were  a  conquering  monarch  who,  having 
taken captive a whole nation, employs this slave labor in a wide variety 
of devilish vocations and pays the “wages of death” (6:23). 
 
1)  Sin and power. 
 
Thus it is sin that has “reigned,” basileÚw, basileuo¯ , that has held 
sway  over  the  whole  human  race,  and  to  such  a  degree  that  none 
have  been  able,  of  themselves,  to  escape  such  servitude.  Man  is 
wholly  directed  by  the  inherited  nature  of  Adam  (John  8:34). 
However,  concerning  the  man  in  the  street  today,  while  he 
acknowledges  sin  in  general  as  a  universal  problem  related  to 
imperfection, he declines to admit his helpless captivity on account 
of his boast in autonomy and self-determination. 
 
2)  Death and its captivity. 
 
As a consequence, sin reigned “in [the] death [from Adam?],” that 
is  sin  reigned  in  the  inevitable  consequence  of  death.  Man  as  a 
sinner  will  debate  over  the  matter  of  sin;  but  beyond  debate  in 
human experience is the inevitability of death as an imposed divine 
                                            
45
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 5, p. 313. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  168 
sentence.  Although  man  will  speak  of  death  in  naturalistic  terms, 
nevertheless his inner fear and loathing of death causes him at the 
same time to inwardly “consider his ways” (Hag. 1:5, 7), whatever 
empty  bravado  he  may  outwardly  express.  Morris  significantly 
points  out:  “The  mention  of  eternal  life  in  the  second  half  of  the 
verse indicates that we should understand death here as spiritual as 
well  as  physical.”
46
  Thus,  in  being  reminded  of  our  inescapable 
confrontation with the “wages” of sin, and hence the power of sin, 
we  have  a  prelude  to  the  greater  power  of  grace.  Suddenly  grace 
becomes  not  an  abstraction,  a  mere  aid  to  virtue,  but  a  mighty 
conquering force!   
 
(b)  Grace reigns in life. 
 
We  are  now  introduced,  also  by  way  of  personification,  to  grace  as  a 
rival conquering monarch whose greater power presents the good news 
and  prospect  of  real  emancipation  to  citizens  of  the  captive  nation. 
However,  by  way  of  clarification,  this  reigning  grace  must  be 
distinguished  from  other  differing  uses  of  the  term.
47
  First,  assisting 
grace, according to Unitarianism, where God in general helps with grace 
those  who  help  themselves.  Second  amoral  grace,  according  to 
licentiousness, where God in general helps even blatant scoundrels since 
he  overlooks  their  sin.  Third,  infused  grace,  according  to  Roman 
Catholicism, where the Church mediates grace via the sacraments to the 
baptized.  Fourth,  universal  grace,  according  to  Arminianism,  where 
sufficient  grace  is  given  to  all  so  that  they  might  believe,  if  the  will. 
None of these come close to the glory and majesty of reigning grace.  
 
1)  Grace and power. 
 
Thus  grace  “reigns,”  again  basileÚw,  basileuo¯ ,  that  is  it 
sovereignly  conquers  the  “reign  of  death,”  including  its  root,  and 
that  individually  as  well  as  corporately.  Then  what  precisely  does 
Paul mean here by “grace”? “Unmerited/demerited favor” is surely 
included  yet  not  inclusive  enough  as  the  following  context 
suggests.  Surely  it  must  be  the  totality  of  the  gospel  that  takes  us 
back  to  God’s  eternal  decree  and  gathers  together  the  gracious 
saving  of  God’s  elect,  as  hopeless  sinners,  by  means  of  the 
economic working of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This is not 
merely  grace  on  offer,  but  grace  effectively  saving  and  keeping. 
John Newton has written: 
 
 
                                            
46
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 242. Cf. Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, pp. 236-7, 
where death includes eternal misery in contrast with eternal life. 
47
  The  stimulus  with  regard  to  these  negative  categories  comes  from  Lloyd-Jones’  own  classification  at  this 
point. Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 5, p. 317. 
THE RESULTANT ASSURANCE OF GOSPEL RECONCILIATION  169
Grace reigns to pardon crimson sins, 
   To melt the hardest hearts; 
And from the work it once begins 
   It never once departs. 
‘Twas grace that called our souls at first; 
   By grace thus far we’re come; 
And grace will help us through the worst, 
   And lead us safely home. 
2)  Grace and righteousness. 
 
Thus grace reigns “through righteousness,” that is by means of the 
vindication  of  His  righteousness,  3:25-26,  and  principally  here 
“the  gift  of  righteousness,”  v.  17.  Whereas  sin  corrupts  through 
disobedience,  the  dominion  of  grace,  its  effectual  working,  has 
absolute  holy  integrity,  according  to  a  “just  and  justifying  God,” 
3:25-26;  cf.  1:16-17.  But  further,  it  is  not  only  the  righteous 
character  of  God  that  is  upheld  and  evident  in  this  gospel  of 
sovereign  grace;  rather  this  righteous  God  gratuitously  imputes 
and imparts His righteousness to unrighteous sinners. 
 
3)  Grace and life. 
 
Thus grace reigns “to eternal life,” previously described in vs. 17-
18,  it  having  vanquished  death.  Of  course  this  life  is  not  simply 
linear and temporal, but rather the indwelling, saving life and “gift 
of  God  .  .  .  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord”  (6:23;  cf.  2:7;  I  Tim.  6:12, 
19; Tit. 1:1-2; 3:7). So “the last Adam became a life-giving spirit” 
(I Cor. 15:45; cf. I John 1:1-3; 5:11-12, 20). Here we arrive at the 
living  God’s  ultimate  purpose,  grace  through  righteousness  being 
the  means,  namely  bringing  the  dead  to  life  so  that  they  might 
“glorify Him and enjoy Him forever.” 
 
4)  Grace and Jesus Christ. 
 
Thus  grace  reigns  “through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,”  and  all  of  its 
power,  righteousness,  and  life,  are  mediated  through  him.  Thus 
Haldane concludes:  
Jesus Christ is that eternal life which was with the Father, and was 
manifested unto us; and the Father hath given Him power over  all 
flesh,  to  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  He  hath  given  Him.  ‘My 
sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I 
give  unto  them  eternal  life.’  The  termination,  then,  of  the  reign  of 
death  over  those  whom  He  [Christ]  represents,  and  the  establish-
ment  of  the  reign  of  grace  through  the  everlasting  righteousness 
which He has brought in, are all by Jesus Christ. He hath abolished 
death.  By  Him  came  grace  and  truth;  He  brought  life  and 
immortality to light. He ‘is the true God, and eternal life.’ And ‘to 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  170 
this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose, and  revived,  that  He might be 
the Lord both of the dead and the living.’
48
  
 
(c)  By way of application, Lloyd-Jones comments:  
Thank  God  for  the  power  of  the  reign  of  grace.  This  is  the  ground  of 
assurance. It is because of this that we can be certain He will never let us 
go.  Our  frail  grasp  often  lets  go  of  Him,  but  He  will  never  let  us  go. 
Hudson  Taylor  used  to  translate  the  statement  in  Mark  11:22  which  in 
most Bibles reads, ‘Have faith in God’. He said it should be, ‘Hold on to 
the faithfulness of God.’ . . . Oh, the blessed, the powerful reign of grace! 
Do you feel it around and about you? Are you aware of its clutches and 
of its hold? Do you know of your security? It is all in the power of grace. 
Thank God for it!
49
  
Doubtless it is true that Paul intends to stimulate assurance by means of 
his  presentation  of  the  sin  and  death  vanquishing  gospel  of  sovereign 
grace.  However,  it  would  be  equally  true  that  the  Apostle  intends  that 
such understanding stimulate the fervent worship of God as appears to 
be  the  case  in  11:33-36.  Genuine  assurance  will  inevitably  respond  in 
this  manner,  and  of  course  this  is  what  Lloyd-Jones  means  when  he 
concludes, “Thank God for it!” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
48
  Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 238. 
49
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 5, pp. 354-5. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
ROMANS 6:1-23 - THE REIGN OF GRACE AND 
SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
 
HREE  interrelated  elements  confront  the  student  of  Romans  6  at  this  juncture  that  must  be 
considered if a true and comprehensive understanding of the mind of God is to be grasped. 
They are continuity, progression, and polemic. To begin with, it ought to be obvious even from v. 
1  that  there  is  immediate  continuity.  Further,  the  vocabulary  of  this  section  covers  most  of  the 
major  doctrinal  themes  that  have been  taught  thus  far,  even  if  not with  the  same  proportion  of 
emphasis.  Here  we  continue  to  interact  with  grace,  death,  sin,  law,  life,  righteousness/ 
unrighteousness,  even  justification  in  v.  7.  However  there  is  also  progression  with  a  polemical 
tone that is now injected and continues through chapter 7 as well. There is a necessary negative 
response that confronts the perversion of what Paul has been so passionately teaching thus far. In 
this  same  vein  there  is  the  incorporation  of  the  new  themes  of  “freedom”  vs.  7,  20,  22,  and 
“sanctification” vs. 19, 22, that necessarily result from the nature of the challenge that is brought 
against the true gospel. Hence, while it is correct to state that chapter 6 formally launches us into 
the  realm  of  explicit  teaching  on  Christian  sanctification,  yet  chapters  6-7  emphasize  this  truth 
reactively while in chapter 8, the air having been cleared so to speak, there is a positive, climactic, 
and exalted presentation.  
The  broad  connection  here  with  chapter  5  concerns  the  fact  that  justification  has  resulted  in 
reconciliation,  and  such  union  has  included  the  supremacy  of  eternal  life  in  Christ  over  sin  and 
death in Adam. This triumph of Christ over Adam’s sinful legacy and the Law’s condemnation is 
climactically described in v. 21 as “the reign of grace” that has vanquished “the reign of sin and 
death.”  Hence,  this  sovereignty  of  grace,  and  the  assurance  it  brings  are  yet  open  to  gross 
misrepresentation, and thus the whole matter of the ongoing sanctified life of a true child of God 
is now dealt with in major detail.  
Furthermore,  the  transition  from  justification  to  sanctification  finds  its  fulfilment  here  without 
the  necessary  order,  connectedness  and  distinctiveness  of  these  doctrines  being  lost.
1
  While  the 
term  “justification”  is  not  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  yet  this  foundational  truth  undergirds  the 
whole of its teaching. Therefore at this juncture it cannot be too strongly stated that the study of 
Romans in continuity is a most vital matter. Some holiness conventions have tended to focus only 
on  Romans  5-8,  and  the  relative  neglect  of  Romans  1-4  in  this  regard  has  surely  contributed 
toward a truncated understanding of biblical sanctification. 
 
 
A.  THE PERVERSION OF THE REIGN OF GOSPEL GRACE, VS. 1-14. 
 
 This section and vs. 15-23 are two units of thought that both commence with exclamatory 
questions concerning matters of great controversy. While some claim that Paul’s intent here 
is  one  of  teaching  style  after  the  manner  of  3:1-8,  in  view  of  the  Apostle’s  turbulent 
endeavors that have now reached the middle of his third missionary journey, it is difficult to 
avoid the inference here, concerning the matter of antinomianism, that we have a passionate 
                                            
1
  For  a  succinct  statement  on  this  vital  matter  refer  to  J.  C.  Ryle,  Holiness,  pp.  29-32,  as  well  as  pp.  326-30 
where an extract from Robert Trail provides added explanation. 
T 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
172 
response  to  a  frequently  encountered  objection,  as  3:8  seems  to  plainly  indicate  (cf.  Acts 
21:21, 28; 24:5-6). When the gospel is faithfully upheld in all of its purity in holy grace, it 
ought  to  be  expected  that  a  world  indulgent  in  sin  will  “turn  the  grace  of  our  God  into 
lasciviousness” (Jude 4).  
 
1.  A perverse proposition, v. 1. 
 
  In  the  light  of  the  sovereignty  of  grace  in  5:21,  says  Paul’s  challenger,  ought  we  not 
logically  conclude  that  such  a  doctrine  gives  no  encouragement  to  quit  sinning,  but 
rather  tends  to  promote  continuance  in  sin  and  licentiousness?  Further,  could  we  not 
reason  that  the  more  we  sin,  the  more  that  grace  will  be  stimulated  to  rise  to  the 
occasion?  Therefore,  to  sin  more  is  to  exalt  grace.  So  let  us  give  a  round  of  applause 
for sinners and sinning! To use a human analogy, which reveals the absurdity of such 
reasoning,  it  could  be  suggested:  “Let  us  encourage  sickness  so  that  healing  might 
increase!” 
  Now this charge of antinomianism, which here surely envisages a disregard for law and 
moral conformity in the face of the certain availability of grace, seems to be the charge 
most  often  brought  against  Paul  rather  than  legalism.  And  this  rightly  leads  us  to 
conclude  that  a  true  presentation  of  the  gospel  of  free  grace  should  tend  to  provoke 
such  a  response  when  the  doctrine  of  sin  is  not  rightly  perceived.  So  Lloyd-Jones 
comments:  
  There is no better test as to whether a man is really preaching the New Testament gospel 
of  salvation  than  this,  that  some  people  might  misunderstand  it  and  misinterpret  it  to 
mean that it really amounts to this, that because you are saved by grace alone it does not 
matter  at  all  what  you  do;  you  can  go  on  sinning  as  much  as  you  like  because  it  will 
redound all the more to the glory of grace. This is a very good test of gospel preaching. If 
my  preaching  and  presentation  of  the  gospel  of  salvation  does  not  expose  it  to  that 
misunderstanding, then it is not the gospel. . . . This particular misunderstanding can only 
arise when the doctrine of justification by faith only is presented.
2
 
 
2.  A radical rebuttal, vs. 2-11. 
 
It is significant that vs. 2-5, 7-11 all explicitly deal with the subject of death or dying, 
and this truth is also implicit in v. 6 where the “self was crucified.” There is an obvious 
connection here with 5:21 where the “reign of death” is conquered by the triumphant 
“reign of grace” that results in eternal life. So here, the antithesis of death and dying is 
eclipsed by walking in “newness of life” v. 4 because we “live with him” v. 8 and are 
“alive to God in Christ Jesus.” v. 11. 
 
a.  Grace brings a radical breach with sin, v. 2. 
 
Paul’s strong denial m¾ gšnoito, me¯ genoito, literally, “Let it not come to pass,” or 
“Never  let  it  be  said,”  unlike  its  usage  in  3:4,  6  concerning  unbelief  and  God’s 
faithfulness, here the same Jewish casuistry confronts a warped understanding of 
the grace of God. 
 
                                            
2
  Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 8-9. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
173
The  KJV  less  accurately  declares,  “How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  son,  live  any 
longer therein?” Rather it should read, “Whoever we are who died to [the] sin [of 
Adam?],  how  shall  we  still  live  in  it?”  The  Christian’s  present  condition  is  not 
here  described  as  being  “dead  to  sin.”  Rather  the  aorist  of  ¢poqnÇskw,  apothne¯
sko¯ ,  points  to  a past  event  when  we  “died to [the]  sin  [of Adam?]  But  when did 
the  believer  “die  to  sin”?  When  he  was  truly  converted,  at  that  point  of  initial 
saving faith when he became justified and was joined in union with Christ. It was 
then  that  he  was  wrested  from  Adam’s  clutches  and  engrafted  into  Christ,  as 
signified by baptism, vs. 3-4.
3
 Thus Murray comments, “What the apostle has in 
view is the once-for-all definitive breach with sin which constitutes the identity of 
the believer. A believer cannot therefore live in sin; if a man lives in sin he is not a 
believer.  If  we  view  sin  as  a  realm  or  sphere  then  the  believer  no  longer  lives  in 
that realm or sphere.”
4
  
The exact meaning of this statement “died to sin” cannot be over stressed here on 
account  of  the  vital  teaching,  presumably  consistent,  that  follows  using  similar 
terminology  in  vs.  10-11.  In  particular  v.  10  declares  that  Christ  “died  [aorist 
tense] to [not for] sin once for all” in a most decisive manner. For this reason in v. 
11 the believer is to likewise consider himself “dead to sin” in the same conclusive 
way, and thus it is consistent to see the same finality intended here in v. 2.
5
 
The corollary of this truth is that it is inconceivable that such a person, being alive 
unto  God,  should  live  a  life  that  is  indicative  of  being  dead  to  God.  Thus  Paul 
addresses  the  professing  Christian,  “how  shall  we  still  live  in  sin  [which  signifies 
deadness]?” That is, how shall a child of God have a lifestyle that conforms to the 
god  of  this  world’s  agenda?  How  shall  a  transient  pilgrim  seeking  the  Celestial 
City yet solicit entertainment and trade at Vanity Fair? The relationship between 
sin  and  grace  is  not  that  of  necessary  union,  but  of  the  widest  contrast  and 
exclusion. A patient just delivered from a serious infection does not return to the 
breeding  ground  of  that  infection.  It  is  unthinkable  that  the  prodigal  son  would 
desire  to  return  to  the  pig  pens  he  formerly  served  in  the  far  country  so  as  to 
stimulate more  love  from  his  father.  Such  reasoning  is  repulsive.  Why  would  the 
son not do this? Because the father declares, “this son of mine was dead and has 
come  to  life  again”  (Luke  15:24).  This  then  becomes  the  heart  of  Paul’s 
subsequent  reasoning,  that  is  of  the  true  Christian  being  “dead  to  sin  [and  its 
lifestyle]” and “alive unto God [and His righteousness],” v. 11. 
 
b.  Grace brings a radical identification with Christ, vs. 3-7. 
 
Simply put, the almost cynical challenge of v. 1 evaluates Christianity in the most 
shallow  of  terms.  It  has  no  appreciation  of  the  transformation  that  results  from 
genuine  conversion.  Hence  Paul  responds  with  an  explanation  that  involves  a 
transfer  between  two  opposing  worlds,  from  death  to  life,  from  burial  to 
                                            
3
  Douglas J. Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 357-8; Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 245. 
4
  John Murray, The Epistle To The Romans, I, p. 213. 
5
  James  Montgomery  Boice  gives  an  excellent  summary  of  the  various  interpretations  that  surround  the 
meaning of “dead to sin.” Indebtedness here is to his alignment with Godet, Murray, Lloyd-Jones, and Stott 
in this regard. Romans, The Reign of Grace, 5:1-8:39, II, pp. 649-656. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
174 
resurrection,  from  an  old  self  to  a  new  self,  from  bondage  to  sin  to  the 
emancipation of the life of God. 
 
(1)  Being baptized into Christ, vs. 3-4. 
 
The  fundamental  truth  concluding  v.  2,  that  the  believer  “died  to  sin,” 
becomes the stimulant of, what is to Paul patently obvious, the parallel truth 
of  being  “baptized  into  Christ  Jesus,”  that  is  being  “baptized  into  His 
death.”  When  did  the  believer  “die  to  sin?”  At  his  conversion.  So  the 
“baptism  into  Christ”  coincides  with  this  conversion,  and  apart  from 
theological  predisposition,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  obvious  truth  that 
water  baptism  and  its  significance  is  involved  in  the  thrust  of  this  verse. 
Therefore, “Do you not know?” or literally, “Are you ignorant?” ¢gnošw, 
agnoeo¯ , suggests that the saints at Rome ought to understand what is about 
to  be  taught.
6
  Hence  it  seems  inconceivable  that  Christians,  as  addressees, 
would conclude that, as some commentators have declared, the ordinance of 
baptism has no meaning in vs. 3-4 whatsoever.
7
 
 
(a)  Baptism into his death, v. 3. 
 
“Baptism”  is  a  word  that  suggests,  to  most  people,  the  application  of 
water  in  a  Christian  ordinance.  This  being  so,  misplaced  focus  is 
directed  toward  the  sign  rather  than  the  far  greater  importance  of  its 
significance. Certainly Paul has water baptism in mind here, yet only in 
a  secondary  sense.  What  is  of  supreme  concern  is  that  which  water 
baptism  pictures,  and  that  is  real  and  personal  union  with  the  Lord 
Jesus Christ.  
 
1)  Baptism as thorough identification. 
 
The  English  words  “baptize/baptism”  are  transliterations  of 
bapt…zw, baptizo¯  / b£ptw, bapto¯  / b£ptisma, baptisma, and as such 
give no indication of their meaning. Greek lexicons are in common 
agreement that the essential meaning is to dip, immerse, wash (and 
cleanse  in  a  thorough  sense),  plunge,  sink,  drench,  overwhelm.”
8
 
Note  that  in  the  New  Testament  there  is  an  alternative  word  for 
“sprinkling,”  ·ant…zw,  rhantizo¯ ,  (only  Mark  7:4;  Heb.  9:13,  19, 
21;  10:22).
9
  Thus  Christian  baptism,  as  an  ordinance,  is  a  literal 
overwhelming or plunging or dipping with regard to water (Matt. 
                                            
6
  Moo comments: “By the date of Romans, ‘baptize’ had become almost a technical expression for the rite of 
Christian  initiation  by  water,  and  this  is  surely  the  meaning  the  Roman  Christians  would  have  given  the 
word.” In a footnote he also suggests that most, perhaps even all, of Paul’s references to bapt…zw, baptizo¯ , are 
analogous to Christian water baptism. Epistle to the Romans, p. 359.  
7
  Lloyd-Jones declares: “I go further and suggest that to argue that the Apostle has water baptism in his mind 
in any shape or form here is to give prominence to baptism that the Apostle Paul never gives to it.” Romans, 
An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 34. 
8
  W. Bauer, W. F. Arndt, and F. W. Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, pp. 131-2. 
9
  Ibid., p. 741. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
175
28:19;  Acts  8:36-39).  More  figurative  usage  still  retains  the  same 
basis idea of thorough identification, whether with suffering (Luke 
12:50), the Holy Spirit (I Cor. 12:13), or individuals such as Moses 
(I Cor. 10:1-2), Paul (I Cor. 1:13), or Christ (Gal. 3:26-27). 
 
2)  Baptism as thorough identification with Jesus Christ. 
 
Here  the  child  of  God  was  “baptized  [aorist  tense]  into  Christ 
Jesus,” that is he has, through faith, really and intensely united to 
his  Savior  and  also  ritually  identified  with  him  as  well,  just  as 
Israel  intensely  identified  with  Moses  and  this  union  was 
represented  by  their  passage  through  the  Red  Sea  (I  Cor.  10:1-2). 
But further, the believer was also “baptized [aorist tense] into His 
[Christ’s] death,” that is he who was justly under sentence of death 
through  sin  identified  with  Christ’s  substitutionary  death,  as  if 
entombed with Him. Death with Christ is a radical breach with the 
former  life  in  which  sin  reigned.  To  die  with  Christ  in  intimate 
union  is  to  renounce  the  dominion  of  the  past  economy  of  sin, 
especially in a personal, though not a perfectionist, sense.  
In  contemporary  conversation,  it  is  often  said  concerning  a 
disputed matter: “That is a dead issue!” In other words, the point 
under discussion has become settled; it is over with and put to rest. 
That  is  the  attitude of  the  Christian  who,  through  justification  by 
faith  in  Christ,  has  now  become  joined  to  Christ.  As  Christ  died 
for sin, so we who are united with him have died to sin. Boice puts 
it this way: “[A]s a result of our union with Christ in his death and 
resurrection, that old life of sin in Adam is past for us also. We can 
never  go  back  to  it.  We  have  been  brought  from  that  old  life,  the 
end  of  which  was  death,  into  a  new  life,  the  end  of  which  is 
righteousness.”
10
 Therefore the suggestion that we can blithely put 
a  word  in  for  sin  since  grace  will  be  enhanced  is  a  travesty  of 
gospel  truth.  Not  surprisingly,  in  the  history  of  the  Christian 
church,  baptism  has  always  been  regarded  as  a  radical,  once  and 
for all, signification of Christian commitment. And dare I say it? It 
is  the  thoroughness  of  immersion  that  best  pictures  the  saved 
sinners  thorough  renunciation  of  sin  and  envelopment  in  Christ 
(Gal. 3:26-27).  
 
(b)  Baptism into his life, v. 4. 
 
The “therefore” here indicates an obvious connection with v. 3, as does 
the  word  “baptism.”  However,  added  truth  concerns  the  concept  of 
being “buried,” then “raised” and resultant “newness of life.” The most 
contentious  matter  to  be  faced  here  concerns  whether  the  baptism 
picture  of  vs.  3  continues  on  into  vs.  4,  that  is  whether  the 
burial/resurrection picture is an extension of the baptism picture of the 
                                            
10
  Boice, Romans, The Reign of Grace, II, p. 653. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
176 
believer’s  thorough  identification  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In 
rejecting  the  baptism/burial/resurrection  association,  as  we  shall  see, 
John  Murray  “protesteth  too  much”  when  he  declares:  “The 
assumption of so many commentators, non-baptist as well as baptist, to 
the effect that the apostle has in view the mode of immersion as vividly 
portraying  our  burial  with  Christ  and  emergence  with  him  in  his 
resurrection is without warrant.”
11
  
 
1)  Buried with Christ in his death. 
 
Here  the  child  of  God  was  “buried  together  [entombed  with 
Christ]
12
  through  [the]  baptism  into  the  death  [of  Christ],” 
presumably at conversion. That is baptism also pictures placement 
in the tomb with Christ. Now the reality here is that the “I”, that 
is  my  old  sinful  self  was  crucified  and  buried  with  Christ,  v.  6.  A 
radical  and  thorough  disjunction  took  place  that  even  the  new 
convert  probably  did  not  fully  grasp  at  that  initial  stage. 
Nevertheless,  in  true  conversion  such  is  the  overwhelming  breach 
that takes place. And the question that then must be faced is, in the 
light  of  water  baptism  being  indicated  in  v.  3,  what  mode  of 
baptism  best  preserves  this  thorough  immersion  into  Christ’s 
death?
13
    
 
2)  Raised with Christ in his life. 
 
The  obvious  continuity  drives  us  to  the  essential  point  that, 
negatively  speaking,  while  the  believer  has  thoroughly  identified 
with Christ’s death, that is his death to sin, positively speaking it is 
inevitably true that the genuine child of God has been made alive, 
regenerated,  granted  “newness  of  life,”  cf.  8:9-11,  even  as  he 
thoroughly  identified  with  Christ’s  resurrection  according  to  “the 
glory of the Father.” 
Christ  being  “raised,”  ™ge…rw,  egeiro¯ ,  another  aorist  passive  like 
“died”  v.  2,  “baptized”  v.  3,  and  “buried”  here,  continues  the 
                                            
11
  Murray,  Epistle  To  The  Romans,  I,  p.  215.  Boice  is  similarly  dismissive  when  he  comments  that,  “the  [6
th
] 
chapter [of Romans] has nothing whatever to do with baptism.” Ibid., p. 641. 
12
  Note that sunq£ptw, sunthapto¯ , here and bapt…zw, baptizo¯ , in v. 3 are not only appositional in the text but 
also both are aorist passives.  
13
  To  avoid  the  thrust  of  this  argument,  Murray  makes  a  rather  astonishing  comment:  “[W]e  have  no  more 
warrant  to  find  a  reference  to  the  mode  of  baptism  in  sunet£fhmen,staurèqh  [crucified  together]  in  vs.  6, 
™nedÚsasqe,  [clothed]  in  Gal.  3:27,  all  of  which  bear  no  analogy  to  the  mode  of  baptism.”  Epistle  To  The 
Romans,  I,  p.  215.  Yet  here  in  vs.  4  there  is  the  closest  possible  relationship  drawn  between  “burial”  and 
“baptism”!  Further,  where  is  there  justification  for  demanding  that  union  with  Christ  must  be  tied  to  one 
illustration? Certainly Luke 12:50 gives good reason for Christ’s crucifixion being understood as “a baptism 
to  be  baptized  with.”  As  for  Gal.  3:27,  either  it  has  no  reference  to  baptism  at  all,  and  in  context  this 
perspective  is  difficult to digest,  or  else  it  incorporates  a  distinctive description  of  baptism  into  the  essential 
truth  of  union  with  Christ.  This  being  the  case,  which  mode  of  baptism  best  parallels  the  thorough 
identification of being “clothed [thoroughly outfitted] with Christ”? 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
177
conversion identification that results in the new believer becoming 
“alive unto God” v. 11, and therefore a “slave to righteousness” v. 
18. The agency of Christ’s resurrection, and thus the regeneration 
of the child of God, cf. Tit. 3:5-7, is “the glory of the Father,” an 
encompassing  term  probably  focusing  on,  “the  surpassing 
greatness  of  His  power  toward  us  who  believe”  (Eph.  1:17-19). 
This  being  true,  it  is  inconceivable  that  a  new  believer  would 
commence 
14
  to  “walk  in  newness  of  life”  and  at  the  same  time 
direct his steps toward his former life of carnal indulgence. 
Of  course,  if  the  burial  proposition  commencing  this  verse  is 
pictured  by  immersion  in  baptism,  it  is  difficult  to  deny  that  the 
linked  resurrection  proposition  is  likewise  representative  of 
emergence in baptism. Thus Haldane gives an excellent description 
of  the  relationship  that  exists  here  between  God’s  appointed  sign 
and its significance.  
Christians are therefore represented as buried with Him by baptism 
into  His  [Christ’s]  death,  in  token  that  they  really  died  with  Him; 
and if buried with him, it is not that they shall remain in the grave, 
but  that,  as  Christ  arose  from  the  dead,  they  should  also  arise. 
Their baptism, then, is the figure of their complete deliverance from 
the  guilt  of  sin,
15
  signifying  that  God  places  to  their  account  the 
death  of  Christ  as  their  own  death:  it  is  also  a  figure  of  their 
purification  and  resurrection  and  resurrection  for  the  service  of 
God.
16
 
 
(2)  Being united to Christ, vs. 5-7. 
 
While  the  same  essential  truth  is  described  as  in  v.  4,  that  of  Christian 
conversion bringing  about  a radical  breach  with  sin,  yet  it  is  presented  here 
with new and developed features. The baptism representation recedes and a 
new  picture,  not  wholly  unrelated,  emerges  of  the  believer’s  close 
identification  with  Christ,  that  is  of  “growth  together”  that  results  in 
emancipation  and  resurrection.  The  major  theme  of  death  retains  its 
importance  in  reflecting  the  glory  of  deliverance  from  bondage,  and 
resurrection life.   
 
                                            
14
  The ingressive aorist here of peripatšw, peripateo¯ , indicates the beginning of this walk.  
15
  Though  this  statement  is  good  in  general,  we  would  at  this  point  side  with  Moo’s  comment  on  v.  2:  “The 
idea, then, is of a decisive separation from sin. This separation could be a separation from the penalty [guilt] 
due because of sin [referring to Haldane at this point], but the context demonstrates that Paul is talking not 
about the penalty, but about the power, of sin (cf. v. 6b).” Epistle to the Romans, p. 357. Lloyd-Jones rejects 
Haldane’s reference here to the primacy of “guilt” on similar grounds. Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, 
p. 19. 
16
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 253. Note that there is no explicit reference here to the mode 
of  baptism.  However,  in  the  light  of  this  exposition  it  is  hardly  necessary.  In  support  of  this 
baptism/burial/resurrection  association,  refer  to  C.  K.  Barrett,  The  Epistle  To  The  Romans,  p.  123;  G.  R. 
Beasley-Murray, Baptism, p. 133; W. Sanday and A. C. Headlam, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on 
the Epistle to the Romans, p. 162.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
178 
(a)  Raised up with him from death, v. 5. 
 
The  “if”  clause  here  assumes  the  assertion  to  be  true.  Hence,  to 
paraphrase, “Since we have become joined with Him in the likeness [cf. 
5:14]  of  His  [Christ’s]  death,  then  certainly  we  shall  [continue  to  be 
joined  with  Him  in  the  likeness]  of  His  resurrection.”  The  term 
sÚmfutoj, sumphutos, is stressing growth together while the associated 
meaning  of  planting  or  grafting  is  not  altogether  out  of  sight.
17
  Moule 
well  describes  this  union  as  being,  “vitally  connected.  Not  implanting 
but  coalescence  is  the  idea.”
18
  John  12:24  has  application  here  in  that 
the  fruit  of  redeemed  souls  that  Christ  produces  originates  from  the 
burial of he as a grain in the ground that then emerges as a fruit bearing 
plant. That spiritual produce comes forth with Christ in fruitful union.  
The  “likeness  “  of  the  believer  to  his  Savior  in  death  and  resurrection 
must not be pressed too far any more than the analogy of John 12:24. 
However,  the  perfect  tense  of  “become”  g…nomai,  ginomai,  indicates 
that  this  correspondence  began  at  conversion  and  is  ongoing,  even 
maturing. Suffice to say that the Son of God and His spiritual progeny 
both  encounter  death  and  resurrection,  even  as  one  thief  on  the  cross 
encountered death and life with the Lord Jesus. 
 
(b)  Raised up with him from our old self, v. 6. 
 
The  death  and  resurrection  analogy  continues,  except  that  a  new 
undergirding element called “our old self” NASB, NIV, or more literally 
“our  old  man”  KJV,  NKJV,  is  introduced;  compare  “the  old  man” 
(Eph. 4:22; Col. 3:9). 
 
1)  The old man identified. 
 
Here and in Colossians 3:9, it is clear that this “old man” was put 
to death in the past, that is the point of conversion. Thus a present 
conflict between two natures is rejected. Rather the “old man” is, 
as Moo well puts it, “what we were ‘in Adam’ —the ‘man’ of the 
old  age,  who  lives  under  the  tyranny  of  sin  and  death.”
19
 
Significantly,  in  John  Bunyan’s  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress,  Faithful 
relates  that,  having  been  converted,  he  later  encountered  and 
spurned  Adam  the  First  who  is  further  described  as  “the  old 
                                            
17
  C. E. B. Cranfield, The Epistle To The Romans, pp. 306-7. 
18
  H. C. G. Moule, The Epistle Of Paul The Apostle To The Romans, p. 113. 
19
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 373. Barrett similarly writes: “[T]he ‘old man’ is Adam—or rather, ourselves 
in union with Adam, and that the ‘new man’ is Christ—or rather, ourselves in union with Christ. Compare 
Gal. 3:27; I Cor. 15:22, 47 ff.” The Epistle To The Romans, p. 125. Lloyd -Jones comments: “The ‘old man’ 
is the man that I used to be in Adam. . . . It is the man I once was, but which I am no longer.” Romans, An 
Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 62-3. Likewise Stott describes the “old man” as, “the person we used to be in 
Adam. So what was crucified with Christ was not a part of us called our old nature , but the whole of us as 
we were in our pre-conversion state.” The Message of Romans, p. 176. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
179
man.”
20
  Here  a  right  understanding  of  the  present  imperatives  in 
Ephesians  4:22-24  is  illustrated,  that  is  a  present  repudiation  of 
“the  ‘powers’  of  that  old  age  [that]  continue  to  influence  the 
believer and must be continually resisted.”
21
 
 
2)  The old man crucified. 
 
So  this  “old  man”  was  “crucified,”  aorist  passive  again  of 
sustaurÒw,  sustauroo¯ ,  for  the  purpose  that,  “the  body  of  sin 
might be nullified [cf. 3:3], dethroned [aorist passive of katargšw, 
katargeo¯ ].”  This  crucifixion  is  not  to  be  confused  with  Galatians 
5:24  where  present  mortification  of  the  body  is  involved  (Rom. 
8:13;  Col.  3:5).  Rather  here  the  decisive  cleavage  was  made  at 
conversion  between  sin’s  kingdom  and  its  human  head,  and  the 
Lord Jesus Christ’s redemptive kingdom.
22
 As a result “the body of 
sin,” that is the present sin-dominated, earthly body, the vehicle of 
the  new  man,  is  rendered  “de-fanged,”  alienated  from  its  former 
head.
23
  
 
3)  The new man identified.  
 
While  the  “new  man”  here  is  implicit,  in  Ephesians  4:22  and 
Colossians 3:9 he is explicitly described. He is what the believer is 
in  Christ,  that  is  a  “new  creature  [species]”  (II  Cor.  5:17). 
However the identifying feature here is that, according to his new 
classification,  he  is  no  longer  a  “slave  to  sin  [and  thus  Adam’s 
racial  legacy].”  The  “new  man”  has  a  new  Master,  and  therefore 
he  is  not  subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  former  economy  and  its 
despotic  head  (6:9,  14).  This  new  transfer  of  allegiance  is  well 
illustrated by Christian in The Pilgrim’s Progress when he informs 
assailing Apollyon:  
I  was  born,  indeed,  in  your  dominions,  but  your  service  was  hard, 
and your wages such as a man could not live on. . . . But I have let 
                                            
20
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, ed. George Offor, III, p. 118. 
21
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 374. Lloyd-Jones gives a similar and longer explanation concerning Ephesians 
4:22-24, as well as a helpful illustration. Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 63-64. 
22
  John  Stott  puts  this  matter  very  clearly:  “There  are  in  fact,  two  quite  distinct  ways  in  which  the  New 
Testament  speaks  of  crucifixion  in  relation  to  holiness.  The  first  is  our  death  to  sin  through  identification 
with  Christ;  the  second  is  our  death  to  self  through  imitation  of  Christ.  On  the  one  hand,  we  have  been 
crucified with Christ. But on the other we have crucified (decisively repudiated) our sinful nature with all its 
desires, so that every day we renew this attitude by taking up our cross and following Christ to crucifixion. 
The first is a legal death, a death to the penalty [power?] of sin; the second is a moral death, a death to the 
power of sin. The first belongs to the past, and is unique and unrepeatable; the second belongs to the present, 
and is repeatable, even continuous. I died to sin (in Christ) once; I die to self (like Christ) daily. It is with the 
first of these two deaths that Romans 6 is chiefly concerned, although the first is with a view to the second, 
and the second cannot take place without the first.” The Message of Romans, p. 176.  
23
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 68-80; Murray, The Epistle To The Romans, I, pp. 
220-21.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
180 
myself  to  another,  even  to  the  King  of  princes.  .  .  .  O  thou 
destroying Apollyon! to speak the truth, I like his service, his wages, 
his servants, his government, his company, and country, better than 
thine;  and,  therefore,  leave  off  to  persuade  me  further;  I  am  his 
servant, and I will follow him.
24
 
 
4)  The old man/new man illustrated. 
 
There  was  once  a  rugged  horseman,  advanced  in  years  and 
renowned  for  his  lusty  ancestry  and  lifestyle.  His  lively  horse 
seemed agreeably to know of his master’s every sordid and profane 
haunt,  so  much  so  that  where  his  master  went,  so  his  steed  was 
eager to go as well. Likewise, where the horse desired to go, so the 
master was happy to comply; for the horseman and his horse were 
of  one  mind  in  their  travels.  Arriving  at  a  favorite  haunt,  it  was 
frequently  said,  “Hear  comes  the  old  man  riding  his  old 
companion.  But  one  day,  this  “old  man”  stopped  for  lunch  at  a 
roadside inn he had never visited before. Inside he found the food 
different from anything he had ever tasted in his life. There he also 
conversed  with  a  man  who  told  of  good  news  which  he  gladly 
received; the result was that the “old man” was old no longer. He 
had, in repudiating his carnal ancestry, become a “new man,” and 
now  he  pondered  all  of  the  new  destinations  he  intended  to  visit. 
His whole itinerary would now change. Thus he went on his way, 
mounted his trusty horse, only to discover an unexpected problem. 
As a “new man” he now wanted to go to places his old companion 
did  not  want  to  go  (Gal.  5:16-18).  So  he  faced  the  necessity  of 
commanding his horse to obey his orders. The horse continued to 
oppose  its  new  master.  But  the  “new  man”  was  committed  to 
keeping  his  rebellious  horse  in  check.  He  learned  to  continually 
pull  in  and  direct  with  the  reins  this  earthly  vehicle  so  that  he 
might arrive at his newly assigned destination (I Cor. 9:27).  
 
(c)  Raised up with him by the power of justification, v. 7. 
 
An accurate translation here is of vital importance. The KJV reads, “For 
he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin.”  The  NASB  reads,  “for  he  who  has 
died is freed from sin.” Both correctly indicate the close connection with 
v.  6,  but  a  more  literal  rendering  would  be,  “for  he  who  has  died 
[aorist] has been justified [perfect of dikaiÒw, dikaioo¯ ] from sin.” Note 
that  “being  freed”  as  a  result  of  justification  in  vs.  18,  20,  22,  is  a 
different Greek verb, [™leuqerÒw, eleutheroo¯ ]. 
Hence Paul here has more in mind than an illustrative Hebrew proverb 
declaring  that  a  dead  man  is  free  from  sin,  which  thought  is  not 
ultimately  true.
25
  Rather,  the  believer  “who  has  died  [with  Christ],” 
                                            
24
  Bunyan, Works, III, p. 111-12.  
25
  So Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 377, yet such a secular use of , dikaio, is so out of keeping with 
the Apostle’s usage of this term elsewhere, namely always “to justify.” Lloyd-Jones argues that Paul’s use of 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
181
who  has  been  “baptized  into  His  death  “v.  3,  has  been  “buried  with 
Him” v. 4, has “become united with Him in the likeness of His death” 
v. 5, has been “crucified with Him” v. 6, has been “justified from sin,” 
raised to newness of life, emancipated unto righteousness, vs. 4-6, 8-10, 
17-18.  
Murray puts the matter so well: 
The  decisive  breach  with  the  reigning  power  of  sin  is  viewed  after  the 
analogy  of  the  kind  of  dismissal  which  a  judge  gives  when  an  arraigned 
person is justified. Sin has no further claim upon the person who is thus 
vindicated. The judicial aspect from which deliverance from the power of 
sin is to be viewed needs to be appreciated. It shows that the forensic is 
present not only in justification but also in that which lies at the basis of 
sanctification. A judgment is executed upon the power of sin in the death 
of Christ (cf. John 12:31) and deliverance from this power on the part of 
the believer arises from the efficacy of this judgment.
26
 
Simply  put,  the  justified  believer,  in  his  sin  having  been  crucified  with 
Christ, has been set free from that sin, its powerful claim, its ownership, 
its  dominion.  Such  a  release  directs  him  to  respond  to  grace,  but  not 
abuse it. As Isaac Watts has written: 
Shall we go on to sin 
   Because thy grace abounds; 
Or crucify the Lord again, 
   And open all his wounds?  
Forbid it, mighty God! 
   Nor let it e’er be said, 
That we whose sins are crucified 
   Should raise them from the dead. 
We will be slaves no more, 
   Since Christ has made us free; 
Has nailed our tyrants to his cross, 
   And bought our liberty. 
c.  Grace brings a radical reckoning with Christ, vs. 8-11. 
 
While  the  effecting  union  of  the  believer  with  Christ  remains  Paul’s  ongoing 
concern, the focus now changes direction toward Christ’s vital, risen, and exalted 
relationship with God. Such a perspective is then intended to enlarge the believer’s 
appreciation of his vital participation with this risen Christ. 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
“he”  here  rather  than  the  expected  “us”  suggests  “a  general,  universal,  axiomatic  statement,”  Romans,  An 
Exposition  Of  Chapter  6,  p.  88.  But  again,  it  seems  better  to  regard  this  as  perhaps  a  stylistic  touch  rather 
than blur the Pauline use of dikaiÒw, dikaioo¯ . Of course it is possible that in quoting a popular epigram Paul 
incorporates dikaiÒw, dikaioo¯ , to make a distinctive point, as Cranfield suggests, Epistle To The Romans, pp. 
310-11. 
26
  Murray,  Epistle  To  The  Romans,  I,  p.  222.  In  further  support  that  v.  7  here  involves  the  doctrine  of 
justification, refer to Fraser, Haldane, Hodge, Morris, Moule. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
182 
(1)  We are alive with Christ, vs. 8-9. 
 
The  thought  of  “walking  in  newness  of  life”  v.  4  is  now  expounded  upon. 
Formerly dead in sin, the Christian is now spiritually alive, awakened in his 
desolate  soul,  regenerated.  Of  course  such  animation  is  inseparably 
connected with God’s holy character (John 14:26), so that the imparted life 
is  morally  pure  and  a  stimulant  to  holy  affections.  Further,  as  in  Ephesians 
2:1-6,  Christ  is  the  initial  and  ongoing  mediator  of  this  life.  Here  is  the 
feature that distinguishes a genuine from a counterfeit child of God.   
 
(a)  We live because he lives, v. 8. 
 
Paul  will  not  leave  us  contemplating  the  benefits  of  death  as  described 
in v. 7. To paraphrase here, “Since we died with Christ, we believe that 
we  shall  live  in  union  with  Him.”  The  protasis  is  a  repetition  of  the 
teaching of vs. 3-6, while the apodosis is the point of new emphasis, the 
transmission of sustaining life from Christ to those who are joined with 
Him  in  His  resurrection.  The  future  tense  here  of  suz£w,  suzao¯ , 
describes  the  enlivening  that,  having  commenced  at  conversion,  yet 
continues until the future day of resurrection. 
Sterile  evangelicalism  tends  to  focus  on  Jesus  Christ’s  substitutionary, 
transactional,  justifying death  as  a notion  to be  acknowledged; but  the 
necessity of consequent new life in the saved soul united to Christ is not 
accentuated  as  Paul  does  here  and  in  the  verses  that  follow.  Such  new 
life  has  evident  symptoms that  concern  new  appetites  and  capacities  in 
much  the  same  way  as  the  man  born  blind  in  John  9,  having  received 
new  sight,  desired  to  know  about  Christ  and  testify  about  him,  “one 
thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see,” v. 25.  
 
(b)  He lives because he mastered death, v. 9. 
 
The  doctrine  of  the  believer’s  death/burial/resurrection  identification 
with  Jesus Christ  is  based on  objective  truth, the  real,  historic  event of 
the  Son  of  God’s  encounter  with  and  conquest  of  death.  The  life  that 
has  come  to  the  regenerated  and  justified  believer,  v.  8,  is  based  upon 
the resurrection life that the dead Jesus Christ subsequently manifested. 
However,  this  divine  resurrection  was  unique  and  climactic.  With 
regard to the raising of the widow’s son at Nain (Luke 7:11-17), Jairus’ 
daughter  (Mark  5:21-24,  35-43),  and  Lazarus  (John  11:1-46),  here 
Jesus  meets  the  works  of  death  and  temporarily  defeats  them.  These 
were  all  instances  of  resurrection  to  physical  life.  But  at  his  own 
crucifixion Jesus encounters death itself as the Son of God. J. Gresham 
Machen appropriately comments here: 
Do  you  not  see,  my  friends?  What  we  are  trying  to  establish  is  not  the 
resurrection of an ordinary man, not the resurrection of a man who is to 
us  a  mere  x  or  y,  not  the  resurrection  of  a  man  about  whom  we  know 
nothing,  but  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  There  is  a  tremendous 
presumption against the resurrection of any ordinary man, but when you 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
183
come really to know Jesus as He is pictured to us in the Gospels you will 
say that whereas it is unlikely that any ordinary man should rise from the 
dead,  in  His  case  the  presumption  is  exactly  reversed.  It  is  unlikely  that 
any ordinary man should rise; but it is unlikely that this man should not 
rise; it may be said of this man that it was impossible that He should be 
holden of death.
27
 
So it is in this capacity that Jesus is “never to die again; death no longer 
is  master  [kurieÚw,  kurieuo¯ ,  has  lordly  dominion]  over  Him.”  His 
resurrection  was  unto  eternal  glory  (Rev.  11"15).  To  Timothy  the 
Apostle  declares  that  this  Christ,  “abolished  [nullified,  canceled]  death 
and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel”  (II  Tim. 
1:10). Thus Paul exalts, “thanks be to God, who gives us [in union with 
His  Son]  the  victory  [over  death]  through  our  [victorious]  Lord  Jesus 
Christ” (I Cor. 15:57).  
 
(2)  We are alive unto God, vs. 10-11. 
 
Now  follows,  as  an  expansion  of  v.  8,  the  theological  truth  concerning  the 
historic reality of Jesus Christ’s death, burial, and resurrection maintained in 
v.  9.  This  doctrinal  explication  leads  to  the  believer’s  responsibility  as  he 
intimately participates in this truth.  
 
(a)  Christ has finally broken with sin, v. 10. 
 
`For what purpose did Christ conquer death by resurrection, never to die 
again?  Like  I  Corinthians  15:3,  where  “Christ  died  for  our  sins,”  so 
here, “He died to sin once for all.” Yet the language here suggests that 
this was a death like none other, a distinguishing death.   
 
1)  He died to sin. 
 
There is terrible encounter described here. The language, “He died 
to [not for] sin,” is identical here with the believer having “died to 
sin” in vs. 2, 11, cf. vs. 6-7. Yet Jesus, being sinless, could not have 
died  to  sin  indwelling  his  nature  (II  Cor.  5:21;  I  John  3:5). 
However, ask yourself, “When did Jesus Christ draw closest to sin 
and  death?  When  did  he  descend  into  the  deepest  abyss  of 
darkness?” The answer is obvious, so that as the believer is to have 
a radical death breach with sin, so the Son of God likewise, though 
in an infinitely greater, inaugural degree, had a death breach with 
sin; that is he met it, suffered by it, plunged to its very courts, yet 
still  died  to  it  in  his  absolute  repudiation  of  its  hellish  nature  and 
thus  vanquished  its  overtures.  Simply  put,  Jesus  “died  to  death, 
and sin which it represents.” Thus Jesus “died to sin” when, as he 
himself declared, “I have authority to lay it [My life] down, and I 
have authority to take it up again” (John 10:18).  
                                            
27
  J. Gresham Machen, The Christian Faith in the Modern World, pp. 214-5. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
184 
Lloyd-Jones  explains  that,  “He  [Christ]  died  to  that  whole 
relationship to sin into which He once put Himself voluntarily for 
our  salvation.  He  has  died  unto  it  as  a  power,  as  something  that 
reigns, as we have seen in chapter 5 – something that has a realm 
and a rule and an authority.”
28
 
There  is  also  decisive  victory  described  here,  for  He  died  to  sin 
“once  for  all”  ™f£pax,  ephapax,  (cf.  Heb.  7:27;  9:12;  10:10),  a 
strengthened  form.  Thus  Christ  so  dealt  death  a  fatal  blow,  he  so 
triumphed  over  sin,  that  his  victory  has  an  eternal  finality  to  it,  a 
complete  satisfaction  in  it,  and  an  unrepeatable  glory  about  it. 
Therefore,  that  past  historic  triumph  is  also  a  present  and  eternal 
triumph for the Christian who is united to Christ.  
 
2)  He lives to God. 
 
So  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  and  his  ascension  to  the  Father  is  a 
corollary of the fact that he “died to death and sin.” Thus he now 
“lives to [or for] God,” that is, in an exalted sense, he continues to 
“do  the  things  that  are  pleasing  to  Him”  (John  8:29).  In  other 
words, that will relate to the practical thrust of v. 11, Jesus having 
returned  to  the  Father  is  consumed  with  being  godly  in  the 
presence of God.
29
 
 
(b)  Christians have finally broken with sin, v. 11. 
 
Paul  has  not  left  behind  the  gross  proposition  of  v.  1.  Rather  he  now 
assaults it with new and logical vigor, except that his approach is one of 
practical  exhortation.  Vs.  1-10  have  all  been  concerned  with  doctrine; 
now  the  application  is  forcefully  pressed  home  to  the  Christians  in 
Rome 
Therefore, in the light of your identification with this Christ who really 
“died to sin” and now really “lives to God,” so “reckon yourselves” to 
be “dead to sin” and “alive to God.” Here log…zomai, logizomai, means 
“to  account  as  true,  to  focus  on  the  reality  of  a  situation,  to  regard  as 
the actual state of affairs.” It does not mean to assert what in fact is not 
true, to mentally conceive above the reality of this world, to think with 
determination so as to bring about change.
30
 Rather it means to live in 
                                            
28
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 103. Also refer to the similar explanation of Murray, 
Epistle To The Romans, I, pp. 224-5.  
29
  While it is true, as Lloyd-Jones states, that “Christ is no longer ‘in the realm of sin and death’. He is in the 
realm of God, and of glory, and of majesty,” Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 110, yet the text here 
describes  a  state  of  active  being,  of  “living  to  God.”  Thus,  “his  [Christ’s]  resurrection  has  given  him  new 
power to carry out God’s will and purpose,” Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 379. Morris comments: “The 
life that follows is a life singly devoted to God (for living ‘to’ cf. 14:7-8). The Epistle to the Romans, p. 255. 
30
  As John Stott writes: “This ‘reckoning’ is no make-believe. It is not screwing up our faith to believe what we 
do not believe. We are not to pretend that our old nature has died, when we know perfectly well it has not.” 
The  Message of Romans,  p.  179. Murray  similarly  states  that,  “it is  not  by  reckoning  these to  be  facts  that 
they become facts.” Epistle To The Romans, I, p. 226. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
185
conformity with the reality of your being. Thus it is vital to understand 
that Paul’s address is to genuine Christians. For the counterfeit believer, 
it  is  futile  for  him  to  attempt  this  accounting  of  one’s  self.  Such 
reckoning becomes a fatal delusion.  
Thus a life is to be lived that is consistent with and appreciative of the 
reality  of  authentic  conversion,  and  this  emphasis  will  be  expanded 
upon in vs. 12-14. But first, the life lived starts with a mental reckoning 
and agreement. This is what Paul calls for here. The true child of God is 
to embrace who he is; he is to know who he really is. 
Consider  the  Prodigal  Son  of  Luke  15.  Having  been  reconciled  to  his 
Father,  yet  imagine  that  his  body,  having  been  used  to  pig-pen  living, 
makes  some  lustful  suggestions  to  the  soul  of  this  young  man.  He  in 
turn  tells  his  father  how  disturbed  he  is  about  this.  In  response  the 
father gives a strong exhortation: “My son, realize that you are dead to 
the  kingdom  of  the  pig-pen  and  alive  unto  your  new  home  with  me. 
You have died to that former lifestyle and are now live in my kingdom. 
Wake up to your present status; then live in accord with it.”  
 
1)  The reality is, you have died to sin. 
 
Its  power  and  reign,  its  condemnation  and  captivity,  have  been 
dethroned.  Its  establishment  in  the  heart  has  been  cast  down,  as 
has the law as a handmaiden (Rom. 7:4). 
 
2)  The reality is, you have become alive unto God. 
 
As a son of God (Rom. 8:14) and new species (II Cor. 5:17), your 
former  life  of  servitude,  degradation  and  shame  has  been 
supplanted by a new nobility and heirship (Rom. 8:17).    
   
3.  A radical exhortation, vs. 12-14. 
 
We know move from the realm of right “reckoning,” which really involves focus of the 
soul and mind,
31
 to consequent “active response.” A young man talks with a friend of 
the girl he loves, though with many doubts. But his friend responds. “Man, wake up! 
Realize  that  she  truly  loves  you!”  The  young  man,  then  revives.  “Yes,  she  really  does 
love me. How could I ever doubt it?” But this is not enough, merely to reckon on this 
fact.  He  must  respond  and  go  and  ask  her  to  marry  him.  So  here,  we  are  now  to  act 
upon that which we understand to be real concerning our Christian status. 
The  Apostle  Peter  addresses  this  same  matter.  As  a  Christian  is  holy  being  part  of  a 
“holy  nation”  in  a  declarative  sense,  having  been  “called  out  of  darkness  into  His 
marvelous light” (I Pet. 2:9), so he has to grasp this truth as a present reality. Thus in 
                                            
31
  John Stott is correct when he writes: “So the major secret of holy living is in the mind. It is in knowing, v. 6, 
that our former self was crucified with Christ, in knowing, v. 3, that baptism into Christ is baptism into his 
death and resurrection, and in considering, v. 11, that through Christ we are dead to sin and alive unto God. 
We  are  to  recall,  to  ponder,  to  grasp,  to  register  these  truths  until  they  are  integral  to  our  mindset  that  a 
return to the old life is unthinkable.” The Message of Romans, p. 180. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
186 
accounting  or  reckoning  the  truthfulness  of  this  present  state  of  being  ,  as  a 
consequence  he  is  to  live  a  consistent  lifestyle,  that  is  “die  to  sin  and  live  to 
righteousness” (I Pet. 2:24). 
 
a.  Do not let sin reign in your body, v. 12. 
 
In this exhortation, a right understanding of the expression, “your mortal body,” 
is  of  crucial  importance.  In  an  expanded  translation  we  have  described,  “your 
physical  body  that  is  subject  to  death  on  account  of  corruption,”  and  Haldane, 
Lloyd-Jones,  and  Murray  have  good  reasons  for  strongly  asserting  this  point.
32
 
Reasons for this include parallels with “our body of sin” in v. 6, “the members of 
your body,” v. 13, “the weakness of your flesh,” v. 19, being “in the flesh, [with 
its] sinful passions, . . . the members of our body,” 7:5, “the law of sin which is in 
my members. . . . the body of this death,” 7:23-24. 
Clearly  Paul  describes  our  physical  bodies  as  being  the  source  of  lustful 
propositioning, of desires that confront the “new person in Christ Jesus,” so that 
a continuous conflict rages in this life (7:14-25; Gal. 5:17). These solicitations are 
of the nature of the human body so that it seeks “obedience to its lusts.” But the 
“therefore” here, in the light of the “reckoning” of v. 11, directs us “not to let sin 
reign  in  our  mortal  bodies.”  In  other  words,  the  believer,  with  his  heavenly 
nobility through being united with Christ, is to direct this vehicle of the flesh and 
not be driven by it. His renewed mind is to order his steps. 
Lloyd-Jones well encapsulates this whole matter as follows:  
I myself as a new man in Christ am dead indeed unto sin, I have nothing more to do 
with it, and it has nothing more to do with me [cf. Gal. 6:14]. I have finished with it 
as  such  –  I  myself.  But  it  is  here  still  in  my  mortal  body,  and  it  will  continue  to 
worry me, and I shall have to deal with it as long as I am in the mortal body. Thank 
God,  I  know  that  it  can  never  get  me  back  under  its  dominion;  never  again  can  it 
master me, never again can it ruin my soul. Impossible! All it can do is to worry me 
in  the  body.  It  cannot  affect  my  salvation,  it  cannot  affect  my  final  destiny  –  ‘sin 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  you.’  ‘Reckon  ye  yourselves  therefore  to  be  dead 
indeed  to  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God.’  Yes!  but  in  the  meantime  it  will  go  on 
worrying you. But do not let it master, do not let it reign over your mortal body.
33
 
 
b.  Do sanctify your body unto God, v. 13. 
 
Here  the  relationship  between  the  “new  man”  and  his  “mortal  [carnal]  body”  is 
expounded upon. While the KJV translates here: “Neither yield ye your members . 
. . but yield yourselves” the NASB more accurately translates the verb as follows, 
“and  do  not  go  on  presenting  .  .  .  but  present  yourselves,”  and  thus  avoids  the 
misunderstanding  that  Paul  is  here  exhorting  a  passive  response  of  yieldedness.
34
 
                                            
32
  Haldane,  contra  Calvin  who  interprets  “sinful  nature,”  Commentary  on  Romans,  p.  263;  Lloyd-Jones, 
Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 151-5; Murray, Epistle To The Romans, I, p. 227. 
33
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 155. Also refer to a similar exposition of this truth by 
Boice, Romans, The Reign of Grace, 5:1-8:39, II, pp. 681-3.  
34
  A major thrust of J. C. Ryle in his classic Holiness is the repudiation of a popular view of sanctification that 
claims that the Christian life is advanced by a passive, decisive act of faith, a response to “let go and let God,” 
akin  to  the  prior  act  of  faith  that  justifies.  He  writes  that,  “the  word  [‘yield  yourselves’]  will  not  bear  the 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
187
The  meaning  of  pat…sthmi,  pariste¯mi,  is  to  “[actively]  present,”  that  is  “offer  by 
way  of  sacrificial  service”  as  12:1  so  well  illustrates.
35
  The  “members  of  your 
body” refer, in parallel with “our body of sin” in v. 6, to the physical components 
that comprise the body as a whole that accommodates the “new man.” Note the 
right  dualism  here  where  the  person  of  the  believer  is  distinct  from  the  physical 
vehicle which he temporarily inhabits in this life.  
 
(1)  Negative sanctification, v. 13a. 
 
The present tense here of pat…sthmi, pariste¯mi, refers to a pattern of ongoing 
behavior that is to stop. Because of the radically new status and allegiance of 
the  Christian,  v.  11,  he  is  to  cease  offering  his  bodily  parts  as 
“instruments/weapons”  as  if  in  the  constant  military  service  of 
unrighteousness personified, that is sin as a commanding, tyrant. As Thomas 
Manton suggests, this activity could be likened to spiritual treason, “because 
sin is a usurper, whereas God hath full and clear right both to our bodies and 
our souls, for he made them both. . . . Now he is a traitor to his country that 
supplieth the enemy with arms; you wrong God, and wrong your own bodies 
and souls.”
36
 
 
(2)  Positive sanctification, v. 13b. 
 
The (ingressive) aorist tense here of pat…sthmi, pariste¯mi, refers to a pattern 
of  behavior,  a  presentation  that  is  to  be  immediately  commenced  and 
continued.  The  body  is  to  be  offered  in  the  service  of  righteousness 
personified, that is Jesus Christ the righteous one (I John 2:1; cf. I Cor. 1:30). 
But from where comes the dynamic that initiates this commitment? It is the 
presupposition  that  such  a  person  has  become  “alive  from  the  dead,”  and 
thus alive unto God. Haldane adds: “Here again Christians are addressed as 
those  who  know  their  state.  They  are  already  in  one  sense  raised  from  the 
dead.  They  have  a  spiritual  life,  of  which  they  were  by  nature  entirely 
destitute,  and  of  which  unbelievers  are  not  only  altogether  destitute,  but 
which they cannot even comprehend.”
37
  
 
c.  Do yield to the reign of grace, v. 14. 
 
Here is an inclusive, grand and triumphant declaration. In an expanded form we 
translate:  “The  accomplishment  of  serving  God  with  your  body  shall  be  on 
account of the fact that sin shall not have lordly dominion over you. The reason 
                                                                                                                                                  
sense of ‘placing ourselves passively in the hands of another.’ Any Greek student can tell us that the sense is 
rather that of actively ‘presenting’ ourselves for use, employment, and service. . . . But, on the other hand, it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  point  out  at  least  twenty-five  or  thirty  distinct  passages  in  the  Epistles  [of  Paul] 
where believers are plainly taught to use active personal exertion, and are addressed as responsible for doing 
energetically what Christ would have them do, and are not told to ‘yield yourselves’ up as passive agents and 
sit still, but to arise and work.” p. xvi.   
35
  Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 258. 
36
  Thomas Manton, The Complete Works of Thomas Manton, XI, p. 249. 
37
  Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 264.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
188 
for this is that you are not subject to bondage under the law’s tyrannical reign, but 
rather are under the new and conquering administration of grace.”  
Because  the  obvious  sense  of  this  verse  has  been  frequently  challenged,  some 
definitions are in order here. “Sin” in context here concerns “our body of sin,” v. 
6,  that  is  the  “presenting  [of]  the  members  of  your  body  to  sin,”  v.  13.  “Be 
master,”  kurieÚw,  kurieuo¯ ,  describes  the  dominion  that  sin  normally  exercises 
over the “mortal body,” v. 12. “Law” is the law of God incorporated in the Old 
Testament,  but  principally  the  Mosaic  administration  of  that  statutory 
righteousness in terms of demand and condemnation (Gal. 3:10-12, 19; 4:21; 5:3-
4).
38
 The parallel here with 7:1, 4, “you also were made to die to the Law,” gives 
strong support for this definition. “Grace” in context here must refer to “the reign 
of grace,” 5:17, 20-21, that is grace as a new gospel administration that triumphs 
over sin and law. 
The  expressions,  “under  law”  Øpo  nÒmon,  hupo  nomon,  and  “under  grace” 
Øpo c£rin, hupo charin, describe being “under,” that is “being subject to the 
dominion and mastery of,” as 3:9 illustrates where Jews and Greeks are all “under 
sin.” The present tense here also confirms the fact that “not being under law, but 
under  grace,”  is  an  essential  truth  with  regard  to  ongoing  sanctification,  in 
contradistinction to the emphasis of Westminster Calvinism, which promotes the 
Decalogue  as  a  sanctifying  stimulus.
39
  Thus  spiritual  growth  in  the  Christian 
involves  not  being  under  the  administration  of  Moses,  but  rather  under  the 
administration of reigning grace.
40
 Jesus Christ does not embody or improve upon 
Moses; He has superceded him (Matt. 17:5; John 1:17). So John Bunyan writes in 
his pamphlet, Of the Law and a Christian, “[T]he Christian hath now nothing to 
do  with  the  law,  as  it  thundereth  and  burneth  on  Sinai,  or  as  it  bindeth  the 
conscience to wrath and displeasure of God for sin; for from its thus appearing, it 
is freed by faith in Christ.”
41
 Joseph Hart has well written: 
 
                                            
38
  Consider  the  most  immediate  context  of  v.  15  which  suggests  Jewish  casuistry,  as  well  as  5:20  where  “the 
Law came in” and 7:1 concerning “those who know the law,” both of which references Murray attributes to 
Moses  yet  not  here  in  v.  14.  Epistle  To  The  Romans,  I,  pp.  207,  228-9,  240.  Refer  to  Moo,  Epistle  to  the 
Romans, pp. 387-91. 
39
  The Westminster Confession of Faith describes the Moral Law, that is the Ten Commandments, as applicable 
to “true believers . . . as a rule of life, informing them of the will of God and their duty, it directs and binds 
them  to  walk  accordingly; .  .  .  It  is  likewise  of  use  to  the  regenerate, to  restrain  their  corruptions,  in  that  it 
forbids sin.” Philip Schaff, The Creeds of Christendom, III, pp. 641-2. Presbyterian Robert Dabney writes: “A 
third and equally essential use [of the Decalogue] appears to the believer, after his adoption. He is ‘chosen in 
Christ  that  he  should  be  holy’;  ‘redeemed  from  all  iniquity  to  be  Christ’s  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works.’ This great end, the believers sanctification, can only be attained in practice, by giving him a holy rule 
of conduct. Such a rule is the Law. It is to be as assiduously observed, as the guide to that holiness which is 
the fruit of adoption, as though its observance could earn adoption.” Systematic Theology, p. 354. We would 
suggest  that  Paul  here,  and  elsewhere,  7:1-4;  I  Cor.  9:20-21;  II  Cor.  3:1-18;  Gal.  3:23-26,  is  teaching  the 
opposite of these declarations. 
40
  Moo  writes  of  not  being  under  “a  force  that  brought  condemnation  of  sin,”  that  is  “the  old  Realm  [of 
Moses],” that which meant being “subject to the constraining and sin-strengthening regime of the old age.” 
On the other hand, “to be ‘under grace’ is to be subject to the new age in which freedom from the power of 
sin is available [which teaching proceeds from 5:20-21]. Epistle to the Romans, pp. 389.  
41
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, ed. George Offor, II, p. 388. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
189
The law was never meant to give 
   New strength to man’s lost race; 
We cannot act before we live, 
   And life proceeds from grace. 
But grace and truth by Christ are given; 
   To him must Moses bow; 
Grace fits the new-born soul for heaven, 
   And truth informs us how. 
By Christ we enter into rest, 
   And triumph o’er the fall; 
Whoe’er would be completely blest 
   Must trust to Christ for all. 
(1)  The relationship between sin and the law. 
 
If  “sin  shall  not  be  master  over  you,  for  you  are  not  under  law,”  then  it 
follows that, if “you are under law, [then] sin shall be master over you” (cf. 
Gal.  3:22-23;  5:18).  How  is  this  so?  Because  the  law  is  free  to  enflame  sin 
(7:8-9). The law locks me up to demands that cannot be personally attained; 
it  magnifies  this  cancer;  it  condemns  my  tawdry,  futile  efforts  at  self-
reformation and ethical performance that reveal my continued inability; it is 
incapable of providing ability; it leaves me more miserable, that is frustrated 
by a clearer perception of my pollution and captivity (John 8:34).
42
 
 
(2)  Living under law and grace in the life of a local church. 
 
James  2:1-13  provides  a  clear  and  practical  illustration  of  two  groups  of 
professing Christians, some of live under law and the others under grace. 
 
(a)  In vs. 1-4, 6-7, 9-11, 13a, these Christians are mastered by law, so that 
they  make  legal  distinctions,  are  partial  according  to  their  own 
estimation,  “judging  with  evil  motives.”  Yet  they  are  thoroughly 
condemned by that same law, even if they only “stumble at one point.” 
They  claim  to  be  saved  by  grace  through  faith,  yet  are  dominated  by 
legal performance, especially that of others.  
 
(b)  In vs. 5, 8, 12, 13b, these Christians are mastered by grace, so that they 
make  no  judgmental  distinctions;  rather  they  are  merciful  without 
                                            
42
  John Owen writes: “Wherefore, those who are ‘under the law’ are under the dominion of sin. . . . Those who 
are  under  the  law  will  at  some  seasons  endeavor  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  sin,  and  resolve  to  be  no  longer 
under its power. . . . They will attend unto what the law saith, under whose power they are, and endeavor a 
compliance  therewith;  many  duties  shall  be  performed,  and  many  evils  abstained  from,  in  order  to  the 
quitting themselves of sin’s dominion. But, alas! The law cannot enable them hereunto,—it cannot give them 
life  and  strength  to  go  through  with  what  their  convictions  press  them  unto;  therefore,  after  a  while  they 
begin to faint and wax weary in their progress, and at length give quite over. It may be they may break off 
from some great sins in particular, but shake off the whole dominion of sin they cannot.” “A Treatise of the 
Dominion of Sin and Grace,” The Works of John Owen, VII, pp544-5. John Stott adds: “To be under law is 
to accept the obligation to keep it and so come under its curse or condemnation (Gal. 3:10).” The Message of 
Romans, p. 181. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
190 
discrimination  even  as  their  heavenly  Father.  Thus  they  are  motivated 
according  to  grace  stimulated  desire  rather  than  legal  demand  (John 
13:34;  Rom.  7:1-4;  II  Cor.  5:14-15;  I  Pet.  4:8;  I  John  2:7-8;  4:19)  and 
fulfill  “the royal  law,”  that  is “the  law  of  liberty.”  Lloyd-Jones  writes, 
commenting  on  vs.  12-14  here:  “The  Christian  is  not  a  man  who  is 
looking  at  a  code  of  morals  outside  of  himself;  he  has  them  inside 
himself. They are in his mind, and written in his heart [Jer. 31:3; Heb. 
8:10;10:16], a vital principle of his being, within himself.”
43
   
 
(3)  Living under law and grace according to John Owen. 
 
A posthumous work of John Owen titled A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin 
and Grace, based on Romans 6:14, was published in 1688. The impotence of 
the law is described as follows: 
First,  the  law  giveth  no  strength  against  sin.  .  .  .  Secondly,  the  law  gives  no 
liberty  of  any  kind.  .  .  .  Thirdly,  the  law  doth  not  supply  us  with  effectual 
motives and encouragements. . . . Fourthly, Christ is not in the law; he is not 
proposed  in  it,  not  communicated  by  it,—we  are  not  made  partakers  of  him 
thereby. This is the work of grace, of the gospel.
44
  
Owen further comments that,  
to be ‘under grace’ is to have an interest in the gospel covenant and state, with 
a  right  unto  all  the  privileges  and  benefits  thereof,  to  be  brought  under  the 
administration  of  grace  by  Jesus  Christ,—to  be  a  true  believer.  .  .  .  [T]he 
gospel,  or  the  grace  of  it,  is  the  means  and  instrument  of  God  for  the 
communication  of  internal  spiritual  strength  unto  believers.  By  it  do  they 
receive  supplies  of  the  Spirit  or  aids  of  grace  for  the  subduing  of  sin  and  the 
destruction of its dominion. By it they may say they can do all things, through 
Him that enables them. . . . We are ‘under grace’ [when] [we are in such a state 
as  wherein  we  have  supplies  in  readiness  to  defeat  all  the  attempts  of  sin  for 
rule and dominion in us.
45
 
 
 
B.  THE PERVERSION OF THE REIGN OF GOSPEL EMANCIPATION, VS. 15-23.  
 
The commencement here of the second major division of Romans 6 reminds us that Paul has 
an  ongoing  polemical  intent,  even  if  only  for  the  purpose  of  using  this  approach  as  a 
preferred  teaching  method.  Though  as  was  earlier  suggested  concerning  vs.  1-14,  it  is 
difficult  not  to  assume  that  the  Apostle  here  responds  to  another  casuistical  challenge  that 
he  frequently  faced,  particularly  from  the  Jews  (Acts  18:12-13;  21:21,  27-28;  24:5-6). 
Obviously  the  introduction  of  contrast  between  law  and  grace  in  v.  14  is  the  basis  of  the 
new  outrageous  hypothesis  that  the  absence  of  the  restraint  of  law  encourages  sin  and 
                                            
43
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 187. 
44
  John Owen, The Works of John Owen, VII, pp. 542, 549-51. 
45
  Ibid., p. 545, 547. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
191
licentiousness. Though it needs to be kept in mind that the subject of the “law” is not dealt 
with in substance until Chapter 7.
46
  
 
1.  A perverse proposition, v. 15. 
 
An  expanded  translation  reads  as  follows:  “What  therefore  [shall  we  say]  in  response 
to  your  declaration  that  the  Christian  is  ‘not  under  [the  reign  of]  law  but  under  [the 
greater  reign  of]  grace’?  Shall  we  not  find  encouragement  to  sin  with  unconcerned 
abandon  because  we  are  ‘not  under  sin  [and  consequent  condemnation]  but  rather 
under ever available grace’”? A comparison of vs. 1 and vs. 15 is as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  both  instances,  the  expression,  “Let  us  sin  .  .  .”  reveals  a  yearning  after  sinful 
indulgence  that,  having  only  been  held  back  by  legal  restraint,  ignores  the  change  of 
heart  for  righteousness  that  true  conversion  brings  about.  In  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress, 
Christian  disputes  concerning  this  matter  of  salvation  by  grace  alone  with  Ignorance, 
who protests:  
This conceit would loosen the reigns of our lust, and tolerate us to live as we list; for what 
matter  how  we  live,  if  we  may  be  justified  by  Christ’s  personal  righteousness  from  all, 
when  we  believe  it.”  To  this  Christian  responds:  “Ignorant  thou  art  of  what  justifying 
righteousness is, and as ignorant how to secure thy soul, through the faith of it, from the 
heavy wrath of God. Yea, thou also art ignorant of the true effects of saving faith in this 
righteousness of Christ, which is, to bow and win over the heart to God in Christ, to love 
his name, his Word, ways, and people, and not as thou ignorantly imaginest.
47
  
 
2.  Grace converts from sin slavery to righteousness slavery, vs. 16-19. 
 
As Paul progresses in his teaching that is derived from the gospel, especially that which 
commences at Chapter 5, he injects a series of new, connected ideas and themes such as 
                                            
46
  The frequency of the word “law” or nÒmoj, nomos, is 3 in ch. 5, 2 in ch. 6, 21 in ch. 7, and 5 in ch. 8 up to v. 
7. 
47
  Bunyan, Works, III, p. 158. 
Romans 6:1 
Let us sin because 
this causes grace to abound. 
Hence we can sin freely 
because grace is cheap, plentiful. 
This ignores the motive of 
righteousness through regeneration. 
This implies the love of sin remains. 
Romans 6:15 
Let us sin because 
we are not under law but grace. 
Hence we can sin freely 
because grace does not constrain. 
This ignores the motive of 
righteousness through regeneration. 
This implies the love of sin remains. 
Both propositions assail the truth of salvation by grace alone. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
192 
“reconciliation,” 5:6-11, “Adam and Christ,” 5:14-21, “death and resurrection,” 6:1-
11,”  and  now  “slavery  and  freedom,”  6:16-23.  This  new  emphasis  expands  upon  the 
thought of v. 6, namely that Christians are no longer to be “slaves to sin.” In the world 
in which he lived, the Apostle was able to draw a very meaningful analogy concerning 
the human soul’s predicament and a large body of slaves, especially in Rome, that, in 
their  misery  and  captivity,  confronted  everyday  life.  However,  Paul’s  major  thrust 
concerns,  not  the  blessing  of  freedom  in  contrast  with  slavery,  but  rather  the 
incomparable  benefit  of  being  a  slave  of  righteousness,  inheriting  eternal  life,  rather 
than  a  slave  of  sin  inheriting  death.  All  of  mankind  are  under  one  kind  of  slavery  or 
another; the question then is simply what realm of lordship we are under, and which is 
best.
48
 
 
a.  Christian emancipation in general, vs. 16-18. 
 
The argument here is not simple, and it  needs to be carefully followed. Consider 
the  situation  here  of  a  person  offering  himself  for  slavery  rather  than  suffering 
forced servitude. Secular instances of this voluntary servitude were a practice that 
guaranteed a person a degree of basic security in a very insecure world. However, 
there  is  the  Old  Testament  practice  of  voluntary  servitude  (Deut.  15:12-17),  and 
the  more  likely  allusion  here  to  this  practice  may  emphasize  personal 
responsibility. It also needs to be remembered that the perverse understanding of 
“not  being  under  law,  but  under  grace,”  suggested  in  v.  15,  is  here  more  clearly 
exposed  as  being  thoroughly  fallacious.  As  Moo  well  states:  “Those  who  are 
joined  to  Christ  by  faith  live  in  the  new  age  where  grace,  not  the  law  of  Moses, 
reigns.  .  .  .  But  Paul  sees  in  God’s  grace  not  only  a  liberating  power  but  a 
constraining one as well: the constraint of a willing obedience that comes from a 
renewed  heart  and  mind  and,  ultimately  (cf.  Gal.  5:17-24;  Rom.  8:4-9),  the 
impulse and leading of God’s Spirit.”
49
  
 
(1)  Slavery options, v. 16. 
 
No middle ground is considered here. We are either in one realm of servitude 
or the other, and remember that Paul is here addressing professing Christians 
about  their former  and present  allegiance.  The  idea  of “presenting”  as  in  v. 
13,  that  of  “sacrificial  service,”  is  reintroduced,  and  the  direction  of  this 
“presenting”  indicates  particular  allegiance.  The  parallel  here  is  not  exactly 
as we might expect. 
 
(a)  Offering servitude to sin results in death. 
 
Our  service  of  “sin”  indicates  our  master  (John  8:34);  our  activity 
reveals our allegiance (Prov. 23:7); our speech indicates our heart (Matt. 
12:34-35;  15:18-19).  If  you  habitually  sin  according  to  the  sinful 
inclination  of  your  heart,  then  clearly  sin  is  your  master,  and  he  pays 
wages “to death.” This principle ought to be obvious to all Christians, 
though v. 17 indicates that such status is the norm of the unconverted.  
                                            
48
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 396-7. 
49
  Ibid., p. 398. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
193
(b)  Offering servitude to obedience results in righteousness. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  our  service  of  “obedience”  indicates  an  alternative 
master  and  he  pays  wages  “to  righteousness.”  But  why  is  “obedience” 
rather than say “Christ” or “righteousness” contrasted with “sin”? The 
“obedience  of  faith”  (1:5;  16:26;  cf.  v.  17;  I  Pet.  1:2,  22)  may  be  in 
mind,  or  more  likely  the  Christian  life  of  holy  obedience  which  is  so 
contrary  to  the  licentious  suggestion  of  v.  15.  Further,  why  is 
“righteousness”  rather  than  “life”  contrasted  with  “death”?  Again  the 
Apostle  has  a  behavioral  purpose  in  mind  in  answer  to  v.  15.  Grace  is 
productive  of  righteousness  (Eph.  1:4).  However,  notice  in  v.  23  how 
“sin” is contrasted with “grace (the free gift)” and “death” is contrasted 
with “eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.”  
 
(2)  Slavery transition, v. 17. 
 
Here  the  process  leading  to  conversion  is  described  as  translation  from 
darkness to light, death to life, sin to righteousness, that is from “you were” 
to  “you  became.”  Such  a  transformation  is  a  decisive  event  rather  than  an 
evolutionary  development.  There  is  also  the  fundamental  acknowledgment 
that  such  radical  change  in  a  man  is  all  of  grace:  But  thanks  [free 
acknowledgment]  be  to  God,”  c£rij  d•  tù  qeù,  charis  de  to¯   theo¯ .  An 
expanded  translation  reads:  “But  let  thankful  acknowledgment  be  given  to 
God,  for  while  you  were  living  as  obedient  slaves  of  sin,  you  subsequently 
obeyed,  from  a  sincere  heart,  that  form  of  teaching  to  which  you  were 
sovereignly delivered.” The order of Paul’s thought is outlined as follows. 
 
(a)  Sovereign recruitment. 
 
The passive expression at the end of this verse, “teaching to which you 
were  committed/delivered,”  is  more  accurate  than  the  KJV,  “doctrine 
which  was  delivered  you”  (John  6:44,  65;  Col.  1:13).  Luther,  in 
agreement with this passive voice translation, calls the active voice, “the 
wisdom  of  the  flesh  [which]  is  opposed  to  the  Word  of  God,  .  .  .  For 
even  to  the  ungodly  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  has  been  delivered,  but 
they do not deliver themselves over to it or conform themselves to it; . . 
. Very similar is this statement to the Corinthians (cf. I Cor, 13L12; Gal. 
4:9).”
50
 God’s elect are delivered over to saving gospel truth. 
 
(b)  Exposure to teaching. 
 
So  God  opens  up  the  way  for  the  troubled  sinner  to  hear  that  tÚpon 
didacÁj,  tupon  didache¯s,  that  “specific  body/pattern  of  gospel 
teaching”  that  includes  sanctifying  influence.  It  is  “the  apostles’ 
                                            
50
  Martin Luther, Works, Lectures on Romans, pp. 317-8. C. K. Barrett similarly comments: “Christians are not 
(like  the  Rabbis)  masters  of  a  tradition;  they  are  themselves  created  by  the  word  of  God,  and  remain  in 
subjection to it. In fact, though being a Christian means on the one hand emancipation, on the other it means 
enslavement.” The Epistle To The Romans, p. 132. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
194 
teaching” (Acts 2:42; cf. Titus 1:9), “my gospel . . . the revelation of the 
mystery” (Rom. 16:25), “sound teaching” (I Tim. 1:10), “the standard 
of  sound  words”  (II  Tim.  1:13),  “sound  doctrine”  (II  Tim.  4:3;  Titus 
2:1), “the faith which was once for all handed down to the saints” (Jude 
3).  Whether  in  the  synagogue,  marketplace,  house  meetings,  or  church 
assembly,  the  Gospel  was  delivered  as  living  truth,  a  heaven  bestowed 
deposit (I Tim. 6:20; II Tim. 1:12, 14). Implicit in this teaching are the 
doctrines  of  revelation,  God,  man,  sin,  Christ,  justification,  etc.,  not  a 
simple three point evangelistic message. 
 
(c)  Heart confrontation. 
 
Clearly the truth received hits its mark and lodges deep within the soul, 
that  is  the  “heart”  (5:5),  which  in  the  New  Testament  represents  the 
core  of  man’s  inner  being  that  includes  intellect  (10:8),  will  (10:9-10), 
and emotions (10:1). Thus Thomas Manton explains that, “the doctrine 
of the gospel is in  conversion imprinted on . . . the heart,”
51
 as it were 
with  a  receptivity  of  acknowledgment.  Such  teaching  came  with  the 
force  of  a  “form/pattern”  tÚpon,  tupon,  with  the  result  that  the  “very 
heart  and  soul  was  modeled  [stamped]  according  to  the  tenor  of  the 
gospel and the truths revealed therein.”
52
 
 
(d)  Obedience of faith. 
 
The  “obedience”  here  is  that  “obedience  of  faith”  (1:5;  16:26)  which 
more  specifically  contrasts  with  “lust/sin  obedience”  vs.  12,  16.  It  is 
thoroughly works renouncing and Christ embracing, yet also decisive as 
the  aorist  of  ØpakoÚw,  hupakouo¯ ,  indicates.  Here  the  will  is  employed 
so  that  is  agrees  with  the  truth  that  has  been  embedded  in  the  heart. 
Such  a  response  is  hardly  casual  or  tentative;  rather  there  is  the 
intimation of a bowing in utter submission to Christ as Lord in contrast 
with  a  former  obeisance  given  to  Satan.  This  obedience  represents  a 
transfer of allegiance as v. 16 suggests. 
 
(e)  Holy casting. 
 
The result is a heart that is gospel-formed and sealed by the Holy Spirit 
(Eph. 1:13) so that the new casting is set firm, completely different from 
its former shape. So Lloyd-Jones comments: “The man who is saved is a 
man  who  has  undergone  this  profound  change.  He  is  in  the  ‘mold’, 
shaped  by  the  doctrine.  .  .  .  God  be  thanked,  that  we,  who  were  the 
slaves of sin, have been taken up by God and put into the divine mold, 
‘the form of doctrine’, with the result that we now obey from the heart 
His  every  dictate,  and  it  is  our  ‘supreme  delight’  to  do  so.”
53
  And  this 
being so, the proposition of v. 15 is proved to be absurd. 
                                            
51
  Thomas Manton, The Complete Works of Thomas Manton, XI, p. 320. 
52
  Ibid. pp. 320-1. 
53
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, p. 220. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
195
(3)  Slavery righteousness, v. 18. 
 
The  “obedience  of  faith”  in  v.  17,  that  is  the  faith  that  yields  to  Christ’s 
lordship  and  gracious  salvation  according  to  the  gospel  doctrine  embraced, 
also  admits  a  transfer  of  allegiance  in  terms  of  ownership  and  moral 
subservience.  While  the  soul-gratifying  thought  of  “emancipation”  is 
introduced (cf. 8:2; Gal. 5:1), yet the necessity of the argument introduced in 
v. 15 requires that it yield to the idea of a new realm of custody, that is an 
inclination  or  captivity  to  righteousness.  In  other  words,  the  freedom  that 
Christ  obtains  results  in  total  servitude  to  that  Christ.  Moo  significantly 
comments:  
In  a  world  in  which  ‘freedom’  has  taken  on  all  sorts  of  social  and  historical 
baggage,  we  must  remember  that  Paul’s  concept  of  freedom  is  not  that  of 
autonomous self-direction but of deliverance from those enslaving powers that 
would prevent the human being from becoming what God intended. It is only 
by  doing  God’s  will  and  thus  knowing  his  truth  that  we  can  be  ‘free  indeed’ 
(John 8:31-35).
54
 
So George Matheson has written: 
Make me a captive, Lord, 
   And then I shall be free; 
When by myself I stand; 
   Imprison me within Thine arms, 
And strong shall be my hand.  
   Force me to render up my sword, 
And I shall conqueror be. 
   I sink in life’s alarms 
  
Thus we expand in our translation: “Therefore, [at conversion,] having been 
set  free  [from  slavery  to  sin],  at  the  same  time  you  became  enslaved  to 
righteousness.”  The  passive  here  of  doulÒw,  douloo¯ ,  describes  the  new 
convert  as  becoming  “enslaved”  rather  than  actively  a  “slave”  as  the  KJV, 
NKJV, NASB, NIV, and ESV translate.
55
 The point here is not that we have 
aspired  to  righteousness  at  the  beginning  of  conversion,  but  rather  that  we 
were  taken  captive  by  righteousness  and  thus  became  “partakers  of  the 
divine  nature”  (II  Pet.  1:4).  Thus  at  the  heart  of  Christian  conversion  is  a 
resultant  change  in  affections  that  is  an  inevitable  consequence  of 
justification. For the heart made right with God is also enlivened so that it is 
attracted  to  the  righteousness  of  God  in  such  a  way  that  adoration  and 
emulation are living principles of the heart, and not simply based upon legal 
statutes and requirements. Thus Jonathan Edwards writes: 
Holy persons, in the exercise of holy affections, love divine things primarily for 
their  holiness  [hence  righteousness];  they  love  God,  in  the  first  place,  for  the 
                                            
54
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 402.   
55
  In  support  of  the  passive  here  refer  to  Charles  Hodge,  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  p.  208; 
Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 225-8; Moo, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 396, 403; 
Murray, Epistle To The Romans, I, p. 233. Note the parallel passive references in vs. 17, 22.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
196 
beauty  of  his  holiness,  or  moral  perfection,  as  being  supremely  amiable 
[agreeable] in itself. . . . The holy nature of saints and angels in heaven (where 
the  true  tendency  of  it  best  appears)  is  principally  engaged  by  the  holiness  of 
divine things.
56
 
 
b.  Christian emancipation in the flesh, vs. 19. 
 
The  first  sentence  seems  an  interruption,  an  injected  explanation,  since  Paul  is 
aware that he is making much of the freedom/slavery analogy, even as it relates to 
the problem which the flesh presents. It is as if he were to say: “This illustration 
[predominant in vs. 6-18], so close to your daily lives, is necessary on account of 
your  human  weakness  and  carnal  fallenness  that  require  clarification.  Yes,  as 
already  mentioned  [vs.  6,  12-13],  the  lusting  physical  body  in  its  opposition  to 
righteousness  [Gal.  5:17]  is  a  constant  foe.  But  let  this  illustrative  exhortation 
direct  you  as  follows.”  Especially  note  how  Paul  immediately  returns  to  a 
consideration  of  the  problems  that  our  lusting  bodily  “members”  present,  and 
how these are distinguished from the new “you” who is “alive unto God” (v. 11), 
and  a  “slave  of  righteousness”  (v.  18;  cf.  v.  12).  The  opposing  propositions  that 
follow are similar to those found in v. 13. 
 
(1)  Former bodily servitude to sin. 
 
The  concept  of  slavery  under  lordship,  so  prevalent  in  Paul’s  world, 
continues to be an illustrative base here. The “old you” of the past offered its 
body  in  active  and  devoted  service  to  the  tyrannical  masters  of  “impurity,” 
or  “uncleanness,”  ¢kaqars…a,  akatharsia,  and  “lawlessness,”  ¢nom…a, 
anomia,  “upon  lawlessness,”  that  rolled  on  with  ever-increasing  infatuation 
and  commitment.  As  sin  commanded,  so  the  sinner  dutifully  followed  with 
relish and deepening involvement (1:32). 
 
(2)  Present bodily servitude to righteousness. 
 
By  way  of  contrast  regarding  the  Christian  norm,  the  “new  you”  of  the 
present  is  exhorted  to  offer  the  same  body,  with  the  same  intensity  of 
devotion formerly offered to sin, in the singular service of “righteousness” or 
“right behavior” and resultant “sanctification” or “encompassing holiness.” 
Why does Paul do this? Because true Christian conversion results in a change 
of  heart  (II  Cor.  5:17;  Gal.  6:15)  that  is  ready  and  able  to  obey  when  such 
teaching is proposed. Thus he repeats a fundamental point that destroys the 
argument  of  v.  15,  cf.  vs.  4,  11,  18.  Therefore  the  grace  that  saves  through 
faith  alone  also  produces  a  radical,  even  revolutionary  renewal  of  the  soul 
that manifests holy motives and affections. As Thomas Manton states: “True 
grace  is  an  effectual  principle,  both  to  produce  its  own  operations  and  to 
restrain sin.”
57
 
 
 
                                            
56
  Jonathan Edwards, The Works of Jonathan Edwards, I, pp. 279-80. 
57
  Manton, Works, XI, p. 343. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
197
Lord 
 
Relationship 
 
 
 
Employment 
 
Wage/fruit 
God 
 
Slavery 
(from sin 
to righteousness) 
 
Grace 
 
Sanctification & 
Eternal Life 
or
 
or 
 
 
 
or 
 
or 
Sin
 
Slavery 
(from righteousness
to sin) 
 
Works 
 
Shame & 
Death 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Grace converts to sin freedom and righteousness slavery, vs. 20-23.  
 
While v. 19 described the consequences of slavery to sin as increasing lawlessness and 
slavery to righteousness as sanctification, Paul now expands upon the “benefits [fruit]” 
of these opposite employments. For as a man invests, so there are inevitable dividends, 
or  their  lack,  that  are  dispensed  if  a  good  master  holds him  captive.  “Benefit”  here  is 
“[good] fruit,” karpÒj, karpos, since Paul never elsewhere implies “[bad] fruit,” cf. 
1:13; 7:4, 5; 15:28, but rather the “works of the flesh” (Gal. 5:19-23). The intent 
here is to prove the superiority of grace that results in righteousness and eternal life 
rather than law that fosters sin and resultant death. 
There  is  also  intentional  parallelism  in  these  verses,  further  expounding  upon  the 
paradox of freedom described in v. 18, which may be diagramed as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
For  Paul,  freedom  and  slavery  are  not  opposites,  but  complementary  elements  since 
perfect  freedom  is  slavery  to  God  while  the  most  confining  slavery  is  freedom  to  sin. 
The Prodigal Son left home to seek freedom in the far country with the result that he 
ended up in bondage. However, upon returning home he found perfect freedom having 
yielded  to  captivity  in  his  father’s  house  (Luke  15:11-24).  Secular  man’s  quest  for 
freedom from God requires slavery to human depravity (Ps. 2:1-3; Acts 4:23-28), even 
as  the  demand  for  absolute  free  speech  leads  to  the  bondage  of  blasphemy,  libel, 
perjury, profanity, etc. 
 
a.  Slavery to sin has a death benefit, vs. 20-21. 
 
Further reflection by the Christian, on his unconverted manner of life, is intended 
to  arouse  his  holy  affections  to  a  point  of  revulsion  and  shame  concerning  his 
former downward course that would have reaped a hellish destiny. 
 
(1)  The absence of righteousness, v. 20. 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
198 
To  paraphrase:  “For  when  you  were  living  as  dutiful  slaves  to  sin  you 
claimed  to  be  freemen,
58
  that  is  you  boasted  in  your  moral  autonomy  and 
aversion  to  serving  holiness  (Matt.  6:24).  However,  this  lifestyle  only 
evidenced the absence of any yielding to the lordly claims of righteousness as 
mandated  by  the  God  of  Abraham.”  While  in  v.  18  Paul  describes  the 
converted state, here in reversal he describes the unconverted state and thus 
adds  further  stimulus  for  obeying  the  exhortation  of  v.  19.  For  the  sinner 
here to be “free in regard to righteousness” is for him to have the freedom of 
the rails that lead downhill to sin and death. Man has neither the power nor 
the  inclination  of  heart  to  go  uphill  in  a  reverse  direction  that  has 
righteousness  and  life  for  its  destination.
59
  Ephesians  2:1-2  describes  this 
“slavery  to  sin”  here  as  being  “dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,”  while  being 
“free  in  regard  to  righteousness”  is  expressed  as  “walking  according  to  the 
course of this world.”  
 
(2)  The outcome of death, v. 21. 
 
To  further  paraphrase:  “Therefore  what  good  fruit  were  you  having 
[producing]  from  that  former  sinful  lifestyle  which  you  now  look  upon  as 
utterly  shameful?  There  was  no  resultant  good  fruit  whatsoever,  only  death 
as  a  suitable  wage.”
60
  The  intensive  form  of  “utterly  shameful,” 
™paiscÚnomai,  epaischunomai,  stresses  the  new  attitude  of  heart  that  is 
“now”  operative  and  thus  averse  to  the  suggestion  of  v.  15.  But  in  the 
past,  instead  of  being  fruitful  through  the  operation  of  grace,  there  was 
only  harsh,  shameless  employment  under sin  with  the  resultant  wages  of 
death. However death here is a comprehensive term that encompasses not 
merely the body, but also the soul, its separation from God and ultimate 
eternal  confinement  in  hell.  Thus  the  unbeliever,  presently  being  alive  to 
sin, is dead to God in his whole being. 
 
b.  Slavery to God has a life benefit, vs. 22-23. 
 
  “But  now,”  nunˆ  dš,  nuni  de,  introduces  an  emphatic  contrast,  cf.  3:21.  The 
paradox of vs. 17-18, 20 reaches a climactic and enthralling explanation, namely 
that man’s quest for freedom can only be fulfilled when he is “enslaved to God.” 
Further, the wonder is that whereas man’s works approach to emancipation leads 
inevitably to captivity to sin, God’s emancipation through grace leads to captivity 
to God, or “the freedom of the glory of the children of God,” 8:21. Furthermore, 
this gospel that results in sinners becoming captive and awakened to God is also 
                                            
58
 Note the contrast here between “slaves,” doàloi, douloi, and “freemen,” ™leÚqeroi, eleutheroi. 
59
 Moo adds: “Paul makes it clear that those outside Christ, to varying degrees, can recognize right and wrong 
(cf. Rom. 1:18-32; 2:14-15); but the power to do the right and turn from wrong is not present. ‘All are under 
sin’ (3:9) and therefore incapable of doing God’s will.” Epistle to the Romans, p. 406. Also cf. Lloyd-Jones, 
Romans, An Exposition  Of  Chapter  6, pp.  273-7, where  he  exposes  the “so-called  good moral  man who  is 
not a Christian.” 
60
  This  paraphrase  follows  the  punctuation  of  the  NASB  and  assumes  a  negative  response  concerning  fruit.  In 
support  refer  to  Murray,  Romans,  I,  pp.  235-6.  The  alternative  rendering  of  Moo  reads:  “Therefore,  what 
fruit did you have then? That of which you are now ashamed. For the end of these is death.” Romans, p. 406. 
Here “fruit” is given a negative quality and remains undefined, though shameful. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND SANCTIFIED LIBERATION 
 
199
productive  of  the  fruit  of  sanctification  and  eternal  life,  7:4.  Here  is  the  final 
answer  to  v.  15  since  such  fruitfulness  stems  from  a  heart  awakened  to 
righteousness, not sin.  
 
(1)  The outcome of eternal life, v. 22. 
 
   The punctiliar aorists of “having been freed from sin and enslaved to God” 
describe initial conversion. As a consequence, “you have [present tense] your 
fruit,”  that  is  “sanctification,”  and  then  ultimately  “the  perfection/ 
completion,”  tÕ  tšloj,  to  telos,  which  is  “eternal  life”  in  a  consummate 
sense.  Becoming  “enslaved  to  God”  is  a  result  of  being  “obedient  from  the 
heart,”  v.  17;  it  is  that  glad  submission  which  grace  has  obtained,  just  as  a 
bride offers in being joined to her bridegroom. The resultant “sanctification,” 
identical with v. 19, is “encompassing holiness” that includes the holy status 
that conversion brings along with consequent holiness of lifestyle. Thus such 
holiness is a present reality for the Christian. Lloyd-Jones writes: “You have 
got  it!  This  is  true  of  every  Christian.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  Christian 
who does not bear fruit [holiness]; you cannot be a Christian without bearing 
fruit  [holiness].  .  .  .  Holiness  is  not  a  feeling,  holiness  is  not  an  experience; 
holiness is to be devoted to God.”
61
  
 
(2)  The grace gift of eternal life, v. 23. 
 
  By  way  of  expanded  translation:  “For  the  wages  that  sin  pays  is  death,  but 
the  free,  gracious  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.”  As 
described in v. 22, the superior lordship of God, in contrast with that of sin, 
is  even  more  attractively  portrayed.  Not  only  is  this  a  conclusion  of  great 
contrast, and a transitional statement that leads us into chapter 7, but also, 
as  Murray  points  out,  it  is  similar  to  the  conclusion  of  chapter  5.
62
  In 
particular, the distinction between law/sin and grace is illuminated. If we are 
under  the  lordship  of  sin,  then  appropriate  remuneration  is  paid,  or  “the 
wages,” t¦ Ñyènia, ta opso¯ nia, that is monetary compensation such as that 
paid to a soldier by a general. Here sin suitably pays death to its subjects, as 
if acknowledging, “Here is what you have toiled for and earned.” However 
God bestows “eternal life” to repentant, justified sinners on the basis of pure 
grace, tÕ c£risma to charisma, mediated through the Lord Jesus Christ. For 
a man aware of his bankrupt soul, this gospel of free grace is the bargain of 
human history! 
  As  Isaiah  55:1-3  declares:  “Ho!  Every  one  who  thirsts,  come  to  the  waters; 
and you who have no money come, buy and eat. Come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without cost. Why do you spend money for what is not 
bread, and your wages for what does not satisfy? Listen carefully to Me, and 
eat  what  is  good,  and  delight  yourself  in  abundance.  Incline  your  ear  and 
                                            
61
 Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 6, pp. 296-7. 
62
 “The contrast between sin and grace is maintained. . . . In 5:21 the apostle had said that grace reigns through 
righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Here in 6:23 he speaks of eternal life in Christ 
Jesus our Lord.” Romans, I, pp. 237-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
200 
come  to  Me.  Listen,  that  you  may  live;  and  I  will  make  en  everlasting 
covenant with you according to the faithful mercies shown to David.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
ROMANS 7:1-25 – THE REIGN OF GRACE 
AND THE LAW 
 
 
ONCERNING  Alexander  Whyte,  the  Edinburgh  minister,  theological  professor,  and  collector 
of commentaries on Romans, there is an interesting account: 
He had a standing arrangement with his bookseller that whenever a new commentary on the Letter 
appeared, it should be sent to him on a sale-or-return basis. Whyte’s habit was immediately to open 
the new work and read through the author’s comments on Romans 7:14-25. If the work did not view 
the passage as an exposition of Paul’s Christian experience, Whyte simply re-wrapped it and returned 
it with a note to the effect, ‘This is not the commentary for me’.
1
 
The  conflicting  opinions  that  face  the  interpreter  of  this  chapter,  especially  vs.  13-25,  present  a 
daunting challenge, and the reason for this is not hard to understand. A somewhat romantic view 
of biblical Christianity has led many to believe that, following conversion, the problem of sin in 
the  believer  has been  substantially  reduced,  if  not  eliminated,  to  a benign  level  of  difficulty.  On 
the other hand, a prima facie reading of the concluding verses of this chapter would lead one to 
believe that the Apostle himself is profoundly troubled with sin in an ongoing manner that hardly 
suggests the living of a continual victorious Christian life. For the moment, this problem must be 
held  in  abeyance  until  the  preceding  context  is  dealt  with,  and,  as  Lloyd-Jones  rightly  suggests, 
only then can the matters of contention be properly dealt with.
2
 
However,  several  matters  need  to  be  considered  as  introductory  principles  that  draw  upon  the 
argument thus far and find continuance through to the end of chapter 8. The most vital matter is 
the  greater  emphasis  here  upon  “  law”  than  in  any  other  place  in  Romans,  and  indeed  in  any 
other of Paul’s writings.
3
 Further, in contrast with the pre-evangelism consideration of “law” in 
1:1-3:20, here the teaching concerns “law” as it relates to the Christian. Thus we are confronted 
with the matter of what is, in Reformation terms, “the third use of the law,” that is the role of 
the “law,” if any, in the sanctification of the believer.
4
 A further important matter concerns the 
ongoing teaching of Paul with regard to “the members of our body,” vs. 5-6, cf. 6:6, 12-13, 7:19, 
23-25.  This  is  not  an  issue  that  merely  arises  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  Hence,  the  earlier 
teaching is to be born in mind as a key to the understanding of vs. 13-25. Finally, Paul’s concern 
remains for the problems raised in 6:1, 15, and he will not return, with sustained emphasis, to 
the  exposition  of  5:21;  6:22  until  ch.  8.  His  liking  for  instruction  that  uses  contrast  and 
                                                
1
  Cited by Dr. Sinclair Ferguson in his foreword to James Fraser, A Treatise On Sanctification, p. iv. 
2
  “Most people who fail to understand the final section [of Romans 7] do so simply because they have never 
understood  the  first  section.”  Lloyd-Jones,  Romans,  An  Exposition  Of  Chapter  7,  p.  1.  However,  many 
conservative evangelical commentators have accepted this premise and yet arrived at differing conclusions. 
3
  The frequency of “law” or nÒmoj, nomos, in Romans is as follows: ch. 2 - 19, ch. 5 - 3, ch. 6 - 2, ch. 7 - 23, 
ch. 8 - 5 up to v. 7. The references in 1:1- 3:20, which mostly involve pre-evangelism, are 23. 
4
  These three distinctions are: one, the law is a restraint upon sin as a revelation of God’s righteousness to the 
world at large; two, the law convicts of sin showing man’s impotence, and thus as a tutor it directs the sinner 
to Christ (Gal. 3:24); three, the law is a rule of life for the Christian, a guide in sanctification. L. Berkhof, 
Systematic Theology, pp. 614-5; Robert L. Dabney, Systematic Theology, pp. 353-4. Concerning this “third 
use  of  the  law”  as  commonly  defined,  Calvin  was  supportive  while  Luther  was  not.  Douglas  J.  Moo,  The 
Epistle to the Romans, pp. 416-8.  
C 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  202
antitheses  continues  in  this  chapter.  In  ch.  5  it  was  distinction  between  Adam  and  Christ, 
law/sin/death  and  righteousness/grace/life.  In  ch.  6  it  was  between  crucifixion/  death/burial/ 
and resurrection/ life/righteousness, as well as what “you were” and “but now.” So in ch. 7 
there is contrast between union with Moses and union with Christ, servitude to the flesh and 
servitude to the Spirit, the law of the body and the law of the mind, the inner man and the 
outer man. 
 
 
A.  THE ROLE OF CHRIST IN SUPPLANTING THE LAW, VS. 1-6. 
 
The  supposed  necessity  of  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  law  underlies  the  perverse 
propositions  of  6:1,  15  which  denigrate  the  sanctifying  power  of  grace.  So  Paul  makes 
further explanation in support of 6:14b. Like 6:16-19, 22, the argument here once again 
ends with the conclusion that salvation by grace inevitably results in “fruit for God” and 
“service in newness of the Spirit.” 
However  what  does  Paul  mean  when  he  speaks  here  of  “law”?  If  context  is  any 
indication, then undoubtedly he has the Mosaic code in mind, especially the decalogue, 
cf.  6:13-14,  20;  7:7-8,  12,  22,  25.  Of  course  some,  probably  fearing  the  antinomian 
implications of vs. 4, 6 in this regard, that of the Christian having “died to the law” and 
being  “released  from  the  law,”  attempt  to  qualify  the  obvious  intent  here,  even  as  is 
similarly done with 6:14b.
5
 More specifically, Paul has in mind the Mosaic administration, 
signified by circumcision (Acts 15:5), and briefly codified in the Ten Commandments, that 
ministry  of  death  and  condemnation  and  fading  glory,  that  is  surpassed  by  the  ministry  of 
the Spirit and righteousness and remaining glory and liberty (Cor. 3:7-11).
6
 
 
1.  The reign of the law declared, v. 1. 
 
In continuation from 6:23, with reference to the legal inference of “sin paying wages” 
to  law  breakers,  but  more  particularly  6:14b,  Paul  focuses  upon  “brethren  .  .  .  those 
who  know  the  law.”  That  the  church  at  Rome  included  a  proportion  of  Jews  is 
strongly  suggested  by  the  pervasive  influence  of  at  least  150  explicit  Old  Testament 
references in this epistle, and especially the necessity of chs. 9-11. However, most likely 
                                                
5
  Charles  Hodge,  very  much  a  Westminster  Calvinist,  is  a  case  in  point  here.  Concerning  Romans  6:14b  he 
writes: “By law here, is not to be understood the Mosaic law. The sense is not, ‘Sin shall not have dominion 
over you because the Mosaic law is abrogated.’ The word is to be taken in its widest sense. It is the rule of 
duty, that which binds the conscience as an expression of the will of God.” Commentary on the Epistle to 
the  Romans,  p.  205.  Concerning  Romans  7:4  he  similarly  writes:  “[T]he  law  of  which  the  apostle  is  here 
speaking, is not the Mosaic law considered as the Old Testament economy. . . . Paul here means by the law, 
the  will  of  God,  as  a  rule  of  duty,  no  matter  how  revealed.  From  this  law,  as  prescribing  the  terms  of  our 
acceptance  with  God,  Christ  has  delivered  us.  It  is  the  legal  system,  which  says,  ‘Do  this  and  live,”  that 
Christ  has  abolished,  and  introduced  another,  which  says,  ‘He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved.’  Ibid.,  p.  217. 
Yet  the  context  here  is  sanctification  whereby  the  law  is  excluded.  John  Murray  agrees  with  Hodge,  The 
Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 243, though James Fraser is closer to the truth when de declares law here to be 
that moral Sinaitic promulgation, excluding the ceremonial law, that includes light given to the consciences 
of the Gentiles. A Treatise On Sanctification, pp. 107-8.   
6
  In  support  refer  to  Moo,  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  pp.  410-23,  and  the  essential  agreement  of  Barrett, 
Bunyan, Cranfield, Luther, Moule. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  203
Paul is simply addressing Gentiles and Jews who have been substantially taught the 
gospel in the Old Testament, and the law of Moses in particular. 
That  “the  [Mosaic]  law  has  jurisdiction  over  a  person  as  long  as  he  lives”  most 
likely  draws  upon  known  rabbinic  expressions  of  this  idea,
7
  though  it  would  also 
have been known that Roman law was of the same opinion. However more important 
is the inference that upon death the law of Moses has no validity. So the stage is set for 
making application of this point to 6:14b.  
 
2.  The reign of the law illustrated, vs. 2-3. 
 
That the following illustration does not exactly parallel the applicatory thrust of v. 4 is 
something that has intrigued many commentators. The death of the husband in vs. 2-3 
should  be  paralleled  by  the  death  of  the  law  in  v.  4.  However,  it  seems  ridiculous  to 
suppose  that  the  sharp  intellect  of  Paul  was  unaware  of  this  “inconsistency.”  Hence, 
Paul is governed by the principle of 7:1b where the person implicitly dies, and thus is 
no  longer  subject  to  the  law.  In  vs.  2-3,  the  illustration  is  not  intended  to  provide 
parallels  at  every  point;  rather  its  singular  purpose  is  to  reinforce  the  principle  that 
death negates obligation.  
 
a.  The law upholds monogamy, v. 2. 
 
A  woman  is  legally  bound  to  her  living  husband.  She  is  a  Ûpandroj,  hupandros, 
woman,  literally  an  “under  man”  woman.  This  union  is  singular  and  binding. 
However, should her husband die, the woman is legally free from the demands of 
that former matrimonial union. The important point here is that the dead man has 
absolutely no claims upon the woman; she is no longer “under this man” and in 
union  with  him.  The  woman  is  “released  from  the  law”  that  previously  bound 
her. 
 
b.  The law condemns adultery, v. 3. 
 
A married woman who is in union with another man is an adulteress. Her attempt 
to be in union with two men is illegal. On the other hand, if her husband dies, the 
original marital union is legally void, and her subsequent union with another man 
is  not  adulterous,  but  legally  legitimate.  The  important  point  here  is  that  in  this 
new  union,  the  former  marriage  has  no  legal  claims  whatsoever  upon  the 
subsequent  marriage.  The  woman  is  “free  from  the  law”  that  previously  bound 
her.  
 
3.  The reign of the law superceded by the reign of Christ, v. 4. 
 
This  pivotal  verse,  which  establishes  so  clearly  Paul’s  teaching  concerning  Christian 
sanctification  resulting  from  justification,  is  expanded  in  translation  as  follows:  “So 
that as a consequence, my beloved brothers in Christ, you similarly were made to die to 
the law, that is be disengaged from any justifying and sanctifying union with the law of 
Moses, by means of the atoning body of Christ. At the same time this new covenant in 
                                                
7
  “[I]f a person is dead, he is free from the Torah and the fulfilling of the commandments.” Moo, Epistle to 
the Romans, p. 412. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  204
his  blood  was  intended  to  unite  you  to  this  Christ  himself  who  is  far  greater  than 
Moses, that is this Christ who, in being raised from the dead, gives life to those joined 
to  him.  The  end  purpose  of  this  act  of  death/resurrection  for  the  believer  is  that,  in 
monogamous  union  with  Christ,  you  might  produce  the  fruit  of  sanctification  for  the 
glory of God.” Lloyd-Jones is correct when he writes: “Here, then, we have, as it were, 
the gospel in a nutshell. It is one of the great basic definitions of what it means to be a 
Christian; and at the same time, and of necessity, it shows us the profound character of 
the Christian life.”
8
  
 
a.  The believer has died to the law. 
 
To begin with there is obvious repetition here, especially concerning the death/sin 
and  life/righteousness  aspects  of  6:5-14,  17-18,  22.  However,  the  closer  focus  is 
now, on the one hand, upon the sin stimulating passé law and its impotence with 
regard  to  sanctification,  and  on  the  other  hand  upon  a  new  sanctifying  law, 
namely fruitful union with Christ, or “the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” 
(8:2-4). 
At this point two divergent interpretations face us. Calvin, representative of much 
Reformed opinion, comments:  
[T]his  deliverance  is  not  from  that  righteousness  [which]  is  taught  in  the  law,  but 
from the severe exaction of the law, and that curse [which] proceedeth thence. Then 
the rule of life which the law prescribeth is not abrogated, but that quality which is 
opposed  to  the  liberty  purchased  by  Christ,  namely,  whilst  it  requireth  absolute 
perfection, because we perform it not, it holdeth us bound under the guilt of eternal 
death.
9
 
This qualified viewpoint retains the Ten Commandments, as Calvin plainly states 
it,  as  a  “rule  of  life.”
10
  The  unqualified  viewpoint  is  represented  by  Luther  who 
states:  
We will not have Moses as ruler or lawgiver any longer. Indeed God himself will not 
have  it  either.  Moses  was  an  intermediary  solely  for  the  Jewish  people.  It  was  to 
them that he gave the law. . . . Moses has nothing to do with us. If I were to accept 
Moses in one commandment, I would have to accept the entire Moses. . . . So, then, 
we  will  neither  observe  nor  accept  Moses.  Moses  is  dead.  His  rule  ended  when 
Christ came. He is of no further service. . . . We will regard Moses as a teacher, but 
we  will  not  regard  him  as  our  lawgiver—unless  he  agrees  with  both  the  New 
Testament and the natural law.
11
 
                                                
8
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 7, p. 29. 
9
  John Calvin, Commentary upon The Epistle to the Romans, p. 170. 
10
   Similarly Dabney, Hodge, many of the Puritans, along with the Westminster Confession of Faith, with some 
variation of thought, all desire to retain the Decalogue as a Christian “rule of life.”  
11
  Martin Luther, Works, “How Christians Should Regard Moses,” 35, pp. 164-5. In this same sermon Luther 
does describe certain benefits of Moses’ writings such as selective practical admonition, promises of Christ, 
and  examples  of  faith  and  love.  But  this  revelation  is  not  a  creation  ordinance  for  all  men.  The  Mosaic 
administration was temporal and Jewish. Notice how John Bunyan has a very similar estimate when he, in 
alluding  to  Romans  7:4,  writes:  “[W]hen  this  [Sinai/Hagar]  law  with  its  thundering  threatenings  doth 
attempt to lay hold on they conscience, shut it out with a promise of grace; cry, the inn is took up already, 
the Lord Jesus is here entertained, and here is no room for the law. Indeed if it will be content with being my 
informer,  and  so  lovingly  leave  off  to  judge  me;  I  will  be  content;  .  .  .  but  otherwise,  I  being  now  made 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  205
Concerning  the  Apostle  Paul,  what  stands  out  so  clearly  in  his  epistles  and 
ministry described in Acts is the fact that, before a critical Jewish world, he makes 
no  qualification  such  as  Calvin  represents,  and  especially  here  in  Romans  6:14; 
7:4.  He  means  exactly  what  he  writes,  namely  that  the  administration  of  the 
righteousness  of  God  as  revealed  via  Moses  has  been  superceded  by  the  more 
perfect revelation of God’s righteousness in the person of the Son of God (II Cor. 
3:4-18).
12
  In  Moses  we  have  a  summary  of  divine  righteousness  without  any 
enabling  dynamic.  However  in  Christ  we  have  a  perfect  revelation  of  the 
righteousness  of  God  that  includes  enabling  dynamic.  To  have  died  to  Moses  in 
this  complete  sense  does  not  open  the  floodgates  to  antinomian  licentiousness  as 
6:1, 15 suggest. Rather, such disjunction concerning the Law is replaced with a far 
more  glorious  union,  even  marriage  to  the  righteous  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
without any bigamous recourse. 
 
b.  The believer has a new covenant. 
 
The  agent  of  change  that  transfers  the  believing  sinner  from  the  old  to  the  new 
administration of God’s righteousness is “the body of Christ,” that is his atoning 
work  that  is  based  upon  the  death  and  resurrection  of  that  “body”  (Col.  1:22;  I 
Pet.  2:24).  The  believer,  through  faith,  has  united  with  Christ’s  death  and 
resurrection so that he participates in the gracious terms of this new “covenant of 
grace.”  Thus  the  “old/first/Sinai  covenant”  is  supplanted  by  the 
“second/better/new  covenant”  (Heb.  8:6-9).  Further,  “When  He  said,  ‘A  new 
covenant,’  He  made  the  first  obsolete.  But  whatever  is  becoming  obsolete  and 
growing old is ready to disappear” (Heb. 8:13). Thus it is “God who also made us 
adequate as servants of a new covenant, not of the letter but of the Spirit; for the 
letter kills, but the Spirit gives life” (II Cor. 3:6). Notice that in Hebrews 10:5-10 
it is “the body of Jesus Christ” which “takes away the first [covenant] in order to 
establish the second [covenant].”  
 
c.  The believer has married Christ. 
 
There is close association between the illustration of vs. 2-3 and the new covenant 
union that is here described. Only because the old union is dead is it possible for 
this  new  union  to  be  valid.  An  ambiguous  relationship,  as  though  Moses  was  a 
concubine  in  the  house  of  Christ,  is  unthinkable  here  since  the  believer  is 
monogamously  “joined  to  another.”  Clearly,  in  this  relationship,  the  spiritual 
health  of  the  new  covenant  disciple  is  exclusively  dependent  on  a  pure  marital 
union.  Necessary  spiritual  nutrition  is  inherent  in  being  united  to  he  who  rose 
                                                                                                                                                                
upright without it, and that too with that righteousness, which this law speaks well of and approveth; I may 
not,  will  not,  cannot,  dare  not  make  it  my  savior  and  judge,  nor  suffer  it  to  set  up  its  government  in  my 
conscience; for by so doing, I fall from grace, and Christ Jesus doth profit me nothing (Gal. 5:1-5). . . . [S]o 
long  as  thou  art  alive  to  sin,  and  to  thy  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  so  long  thou  hast  them  for  thy 
husband  and  they  must  reign  over  thee:  But  when  once  they  are  become  dead  unto  thee  .  .  .  when  thou 
closest with the Lord Jesus Christ; then I say, thy former husbands have no more to meddle with thee, thou 
art freed from their law.” Works, II, p. 388. Also refer to Moo, Epistle to the Romans, pp. 414-8.  
12
  If it be maintained that the Christian will now conform to the Decalogue through new affections of the heart 
that conversion has produced, such an allegiance to Moses would in no way invalidate his death sanctions 
against transgressors of certain laws and required conformity to the whole sabbath system. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  206
from the dead; such union with him guarantees life from him (v. 6; 6:4; Phil. 3:9-
10).  So  in  Galatians  2:19-20:  “For  through  the  Law  I  died  to  the  Law,  so  that  I 
might live to God. I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I who live, 
but Christ lives in [union with] me; and the life which I now live in the flesh [the 
present life of sanctification] I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and 
gave Himself up for me.” 
 
d.  The believer has a fruitful union. 
 
Here  is  the end  purpose  of  Paul’s  teaching,  namely  that  the  grace of justification 
inevitably, inexorably leads to the grace of sanctification, or the “bearing fruit for 
God.”  The  normal  expectation  of  physical  marriage  is  “the  fruit  of  the  womb” 
(Ps. 127:3). So spiritual union with Christ is to produce “benefit [fruit]” resulting 
in  “sanctification”  (6:21-22),  or  according  to  Calvin,  “holiness  and 
righteousness,” 
13
  and  specifically  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  5:22-23).  This 
Spiritual  fruit  comes  forth  as  a  result  of  union  with  Christ  (John  15:4-8),  not 
Moses,  even  though  vs.  7-12  will  uphold  the  distinctive  purpose  and  essential 
righteousness of the Law. Lloyd-Jones comments:  
Here  is  the  real  purpose  of  the  marriage;  we  need  One  whose  seed  is  so  powerful, 
who can so impregnate us with His own holy nature that He will produce holiness 
even in us. That is why we are married to Him, in order that ‘we should bring forth 
fruit unto God’. His strength is so great, His might is so potent, that even out of us 
He can bear this progeny of holiness.
14
 
In  Hebrews  13:20-21  it  is  “the  blood  of  the  eternal  covenant”  that  will  “equip 
you in every good thing to do His will, working in us that which is pleasing in His 
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.” 
 
4.  The reign of the law superceded by the Spirit, vs. 5-6. 
 
The  former  union  to  the  law,  having  been  represented  by  the  first  husband,  is  now 
described  in  greater  detail.  Reminiscent  of  6:21-22,  we  are  further  led  to  another 
“you/we were” and “but now” contrast that significantly introduces the first mention 
of the ministry of the Holy Spirit since 1:4; 2:29. At the same time, Murray points out 
that, “with the possible exception of 6:19 in which there may be some reflection upon 
‘flesh’ as used here, this is the first occasion in this epistle in which the word ‘flesh’ is 
used in its fully depreciatory [derogative] ethical sense, a sense which appears later on 
in this epistle [v. 18, 25; 8:3, 8] and frequently in other epistles of Paul [Gal. 5:16-21; 
Eph. 2:3].”
15
  
 
a.  The law aroused the flesh to sin and death, v. 5. 
 
Prior to conversion, “we” agreeably lived as sinful “old men” in the body of flesh 
polluted by sin with the result that the law, by challenge and innocent suggestion, 
easily  inflamed  those  carnal  affections  that  inevitably  reaped  the  fruit  of  death. 
                                                
13
  Calvin, Epistle to the Romans, p. 172. 
14
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 7, pp. 66-7. 
15
  John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 244. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  207
More specifically, the “we” is the degenerate soul that is encased in a degenerate 
body  comprised  of  distinctively  sinful  members.  It  is  the  soul  that  has  sinful 
passions, t¦ paq»mata tîn ¡martiîn, ta pathe¯mata to¯ n hamartio¯ n, that is sinful 
inclinations, with which the body heartily concurs, cooperates, and contrives. The 
law,  in  its  denunciation  of  unrighteousness,  yet  is  a  stimulant  to  the  unrighteous 
soul. The end result is the wages that sin pays, namely the death of body and soul.  
In the light of the illustration and its application in vs. 2-4, here paradoxical truth 
is revealed concerning the law. Whereas it is thought by the natural man, and even 
the untaught Christian, that the law promotes righteousness, in fact its ministry is 
the  very  opposite.  Consider  the  First  Commandment,  “You  shall  have  no  other 
God’s  before  Me”  (Ex.  20:3).  Such  a  right  mandate  yet  foments  greater  defiance 
in  naturally  rebellious  man.  This  truth  is  beautifully  taught  in  The  Pilgrim’s 
Progress at the house of Interpreter and the scene of the thoroughly dusty room. A 
man, intending to sweep the room clean with a broom, that is the polluted human 
heart, in fact arouses the dust all the more. It is the lady who sprinkles the water 
of gospel grace that brings cleansing. So Bunyan explains:  
Now, whereas thou sawest, that so soon as the first began to sweep, the dust did so 
fly  about  that  the  room  by  him  could  not  be  cleansed,  but  that  thou  wast  almost 
choked  therewith;  this  is  to  show  thee,  that  the  law,  instead  of  cleansing  the  heart 
(by its working) from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase it in the soul, 
even as it doth discover and forbid it, for it doth not give power to subdue.
16
 
 
b.  The Spirit arouses the new man to righteousness, v. 6. 
 
Another “But now,” nunˆ dš nuni de, 3:21; 6:22, further highlights the fact that a 
biblical  Christian  is  a  person  who  is  radically  different  from  a  natural  citizen  of 
this world. The control and dominion of the law over the unbeliever is likened to 
that  of  “bondage,”  or  “captivity,”  katšcw,  katecho¯ ,  meaning  “to  hold  down,  to 
suppress,  to  confine.”  So  the  language  here  reverts  back  to  that  of  slavery  and 
freedom  found  in  6:16-19.  At  conversion  the  believer  has  been  “released,” 
katargšw,  katargeo¯ ,  “to  render  inactive,”  from  the  law  which  formerly  held  in 
bondage,  and  such  emancipation  unto  grace  is  likened  to  that  final  separation 
brought  by  death.  Hence  the  Christian  has  “died  to  the  law”  and  works 
righteousness  as  a  justifying  and  sanctifying  principle,  and  that  being  so,  the 
question  arises  as  to  how  it  could  be  possible  for  the  child  of  God  to  “have  no 
other God’s before Me” (Ex. 20:3), which mandate must be an eternal obligation. 
The  answer  follows,  and  this  vital  matter  will  be  enlarged  upon  in  8:2-4.  The 
believer  now  “serves  in  newness  of  [the]  Spirit
17
  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  [the] 
letter.”  Through  regeneration,  in  association  with  justification,  has  come  a 
recovery  of  the  imago  Dei  as  well  as  an  inclination  within  the  soul  toward  the 
righteousness  of  God  (Tit.  3:4-7).  The  contrast  here  is  between  the  impotent 
“oldness of the letter”and the potent “newness of the Spirit” (2:29; II Cor. 3:6-8), 
                                                
16
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, III, pp. 98-9. 
17
  It is legitimate to translate here “in newness of spirit,” though such renewal of the human spirit amounts to 
the same truth, that is the necessity of divine regeneration by means of the Holy Spirit. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  208
that  is  “between  the  Old  Covenant  and  the  New,  the  old  age  and  the  new.”
18
 
While the law arouses the flesh to sin, the Spirit arouses the soul to holy servitude; 
while Moses’ revelation of the law to Israel at Mt. Sinai resulted in the response of 
idolatry,  the  revelation  of  Christ  at  Mt.  Calvary  resulted  in  a  great  harvest  at 
Pentecost  through  the  Spirit;  while  the  “ministry  of  death  in  letters  engraved  on 
stones came with fading glory,” the “ministry of the Spirit came with greater and 
remaining  glory”  (II  Cor.  3:7-11);  while  the  ministry  of  Moses  brought  the 
hardening  of  hearts,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  has  brought  liberty  and  glory  (II  Cor. 
3:12-18).  Thus,  “the  law  came  in  so  that  the  transgression  might  increase;  .  .  . 
even so grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life” (Rom. 5:20-21). In this 
vein  of  the  triumphant  effectiveness  of  grace,  its  Spirit  animated  constraint  to 
righteousness as distinct from legal demand (John 13:34; II Cor. 5:14; Eph. 4:32-
5:2; I John 2:7-8), Robert Robinson has written: 
O to grace how great a debtor 
   Daily I’m constrained to be! 
Let that grace, Lord, like a fetter, 
   Bind my wandering heart to Thee. 
Hence,  at  this  point,  one  could  easily  anticipate  the  continuity  of  thought  that 
Romans 8 presents. However, Paul must respond to two questions that are bound 
to arise in his audience. First, if the Christian is dead to the law through the law, 
are  you  suggesting  that  the  law  has  inherent  weakness?  Second,  supposing  a 
Christian  attempts  to  be  sanctified  through  the  law,  what  symptoms  can  be 
expected to arise? 
 
 
B.  THE RIGHT ROLE OF THE LAW IN CONVERSION, VS. 7-12. 
 
The  repeated  emphasis  by  Paul  that  the  gospel  of  free  and  sovereign  grace  has  supplanted 
the  purported  justifying  and  sanctifying  role  of  the  law  (6:14;  7:4,  6)  raises  inevitable 
questions  for  those  readers  who  have  learned  of  this  same  gospel  via  the  Old  Testament. 
Further,  Paul  has  just  addressed  “those  who  know  the  law.”  Hence,  his  most  recent 
declaration  in  v.  6  that  the  Christian  has  been  “released  from  the  law”  needs  elaboration, 
and this is now forthcoming with a defense of the law’s proper role and character.  
What exactly is the meaning of “the law,” Ð nÒmoj, ho nomos, here? Primarily, v. 7 indicates 
the Ten Commandments, or moral law as some distinguish, though the whole Mosaic code 
of  the  Pentateuch  is  almost  certainly  assumed  including  the  moral,  civil  and  ceremonial 
elements. However, when the correct use of “the law” is now explained in terms of its pre-
evangelism/pre-conversion usefulness, in view of the broader meaning of the Old Testament 
that  3:19-20  requires,  so  here  “the  law”  must  implicitly  incorporate  the  whole  objective 
revelation  of  the  Old  Testament.  Hence  a  vital  question  must  now  be addressed.  How  can 
“the  law”  be  discarded,  even  spoken  of  so  negatively,  when  at  the  same  time  it  is 
acknowledged to be a revelation from God that has been so highly venerated since the days 
of Moses? 
                                                
18
  Moo,  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  pp.  421-3.  Fraser  designates  the  “letter”  here  as  the  moral  law.  Refer  to  his 
excellent description of the contrasting dominions of “Spirit” and “letter,” A Treatise On Sanctification, pp. 
167-9. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  209
A  further  controversial  matter  must  also  be  considered  at  this  point.  It  concerns  the 
identification  of  the  conspicuous  “I”  and  “me”  of  vs.  7-11,  and  then  vs.  13-25.  Doubtless 
anticipation  of  the  truth  that  follows  is  the  cause  of  a  variety  of  opinions  at  this  point. 
Unquestionably  Paul  is  speaking  of  himself  in  v.  1,  particularly  as  one  deeply  acquainted 
with  “the  law”  of  the Hebrews.  In  v.  7  the  obvious  literal  meaning of  ”I”  would  similarly 
refer  to  the  Apostle  while  also  identifying  with  other  Christians,  even  as  it  is  generally 
agreed that the testimony of v. 9 is similarly a personal recollection. So for the moment, and 
until  we  consider  v.  14  onward,  we  shall  assert  that  here  Paul  describes  his  own 
confrontation with “the law” of Israel, and that prior to his conversion as the several past 
tenses here indicate.  
 
1.  The character of the law slanderously accused, v. 7a. 
 
Reminiscent  of  3:5;  6:1,  15;  9:14,  Paul  rhetorically  asks,  “Is  the  law  sin?”  This  is  a 
stronger  statement  than,  “Is  the  law  responsible  for  sin?”  Rather,  the  charge  is  more 
extreme, “Is the law essentially sin?” So Paul responds to such an absurd proposition 
with  an  emphatic  negation  that  he  believes  should  be  the  obvious  conclusion  of 
anyone. However, the opponent here, whether theoretical or real, is probably intending 
to  argue  that  because  the  law  is  holy,  then  the  real  problem  must  be  with  Paul’s 
doctrine.  
 
2.  The character of the law variously upheld, vs. 7b-12. 
 
Having already taught that the law arouses sin (5:20; 7:5), this point is now expounded 
upon  in  greater  detail  to  avoid  misunderstanding.  Much  Bible  doctrine  involves  dual 
concepts that must be carefully distinguished, such as faith and works, justification and 
sanctification,  deity  and  humanity,  flesh  and  Spirit,  etc.  So  here  the  right  relationship 
between law and sin must be carefully discerned. 
 
a.  Through the law comes the knowledge of sin, v. 7b-11.  
 
Literally we read, “But I did not know [aorist] sin except through law,” and in the 
light of v. 9, Paul probably has in mind a past personal encounter. However, does 
this  statement  suggest  the  principle  that  apart  from  the  “law,”  there  is  no 
knowledge  of  sin?  Most  commentators  agree  that  for  several  reasons  the  answer 
must be “no.” First, 2:14-15 describes the “law” engraved on the heart. Second, 
5:12-14  describes  “law”  of  some  kind  existing  from  Adam  to  Moses;  then  “the 
law  [of  Moses]  came  in”  (5:20).  Thus  man  has  always  had  an  innate  sense  of 
God’s righteousness. But here Paul has in mind the true character and purpose of 
the  law,  especially  as  he  has  come  to  be  confronted  by  its  diagnostic  capacity  to 
reveal  the  profundity  and  gravity  of  sin.  A  man  may  be  aware  of  a  personal 
illness, yet a prescribed x-ray analysis reveals the seriousness of the problem, even 
though  that  diagnostic  instrument  has  no  remedial  ability.  Further,  the  x-ray 
machine  should  not  be  maligned  on  account  of  the  narrow  confines  of  its 
usefulness. 
 
(1)  The law of Moses informs of sin, v. 7b. 
 
The  instance  here  of  quoting  the  tenth  commandment  (Ex.  20:17;  Deut. 
5:21)  is  one  of  only  three  specific  quotations  of  the  decalogue  by  Paul  (cf. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  210
13:9; Eph. 6:2-3). To “covet” here means to lust after, to have illicit desires, 
and  the  selection  of  this  commandment  may  well  reflect  Paul’s  personal 
experience  in  this  area,  or  his  sensing  that  the  saints  at  Rome  would 
particularly  appreciate  this  point,  or,  as  Moo  demonstrates,  “it  stands  as  a 
representative  summation  of  the  whole  law.”
19
  Morris  describes  this 
commandment  as,  “the  only  one  that  explicitly  goes  beyond  the  outward 
action to the inner root of the action.”
20
 
 
(2)  The law of Moses is recruited by sin to stimulate, v. 8.  
 
Sin is now personified; it is revealed to be the real and deceptive culprit for it 
exploited  the  law’s  legitimate  ability  so  as  to  seize  the  “opportunity,” 
¢form», aphorme¯ , as if using military initiative. Sin, in detecting a ripe time 
to attack, grasped that “occasion” when the law was in operation (cf. I Tim. 
5:14). Through the agency of the law, sin deceitfully “produced/performed in 
me [Paul]” a whole catalog of lustings. Suddenly the full ugly measure of his 
covetous heart was comprehended. Thus a legitimate law such as is found in 
a produce store, “Do not squeeze the fruit,” yet inflames the sinful heart so 
that it rises up in rebellion against the commandment.  
The  corollary  then  is  that,  “apart  from  the  law,  sin  is  dead,”  or  relatively 
dormant, and the meaning here initiates  Paul’s personal recollection in v. 9. 
Thus  sin  being  implicitly  “dead”  here  is  somewhat  defined  by  the  Apostle’s 
own  experience,  that  is  of  being  “once  alive  apart  from  the  law  [and  sin’s 
arousal]”  (v.  9).  In  earlier  days,  while  knowing  about  the  law  and  sin 
cognitively, yet he was not troubled by it. So sin being dead refers to a lack 
of  holy  sensitivity  to  the  demands  of  God’s  righteousness  because  of  the 
absence of the law’s revealing work.
21
 
 
(3)  The law of Moses impacts the early life of Paul, v. 9. 
 
By  way  of  expanded  paraphrase:  “Yes  I  Paul  [emphatic]  was  once  living 
apart from sensitivity to the law. But having become awakened to the law’s 
infinite  and  righteous  demands  upon  my  life,  sin  was  so  aroused  [revived] 
that it slew me and as a result I died in despair of self-reformation.” There is 
general  agreement  that  here  Paul  is  personally  testifying  to  his  own 
awakening  to  profound  sinfulness  by  means  of  the  law,  though  wide 
disagreement as to the specific occasion. Did this enlightenment come - (a) at 
his ‘bar mitzvah’ on his thirteenth birthday, (b) just prior to his conversion at 
Damascus,  (c)  just  following  his  conversion  having  been  instructed  by 
Ananias and Christ, or (d) later in his Christian life? The context of vs. 4-6, 
or conversion being preceded by “arousal to the law” and “death to the law” 
(cf. Gal. 2:19) would strongly suggest (b), that is Paul’s arousal just prior to 
                                                
19
  Ibid., p. 435. 
20
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 279. 
21
  “That sin was ‘dead’ does not mean that it did not exist but that it was not as ‘active’ or ‘powerful’ before 
the law or after.” Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 437. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  211
his conversion (Acts 7:58; 26:14), but following that proud period when he 
regarded himself as “blameless” before the law (Phil. 3:6).
22
 
So  the  law  has  come  to  “shut  the  mouth”  of  the  self-righteous  (3:19),  to 
cause man “to die” at the revelation of his deep-rooted corruption. When a 
doctor holds up an x-ray film to the light and soberly declares: “Do you see 
that large mass that attaches to the brain,” then the patient as it were dies on 
the spot; he is brought face-to-face with stark reality; denial becomes absurd! 
So the law has this distinctive function of making man aware of the cancer of 
his  soul,  and  in  this  regard  the  law  fulfills  is  divinely  designated  purpose 
(3:20). 
 
(4)  The law of Moses results in death rather than life, v. 10. 
 
Hence,  this law  that  was  supposed to  have  brought  life,  that  was promoted 
to  Paul  in  a  Pharisaic  environment  as  an  instrument  stimulating 
righteousness and law-keeping, in fact became an instrument of death. In v. 
11 this same deceitful twist of purpose seems to be suggested. Of course the 
law,  not  given  until  Sinai  to  a  redeemed  people,  did  promise  life  for  those 
who  responded  with  perfect  obedience  (Lev.  18:5;  Ezek.  20:11;  Rom.  10:5; 
Gal.  3:12),
23
  though  this  offer  was  to  a  people  already  corrupted  by  Adam. 
Here is revealed that moment of shocking truth that shakes a man when he, 
having  confidently  believed  that  his  human  performance  would  obtain 
acceptance,  discovers  by  revelation  that,  in  the  sight  of  God,  “all  of  his 
righteousnesses are as filthy rags” (Is. 64:6). For Paul, the law that had been 
identified  as  a  friend  became  a  savage  and  merciless  assailant;  yet  the  cause 
of this onslaught was his own sin! 
 
(5)  The law of Moses is recruited by sin to slay, v. 11. 
 
There  is  obvious  similarity  with  the  thrust  of  v.  8,  except  that  here  a  more 
comprehensive  explanation  is  given  concerning  the  ultimate  and  devious 
design of sin. Whereas in v. 8 sin recruits the law so as to arouse sin, here the 
more  deceitful  intention  of  sin  is  exposed,  including  its  ultimate  design  for 
death to the soul through the increasing burden of crushing guilt. 
Of course underlying the idea of “deceit,” ™xapat£w, exapatao¯ , an intensive 
compound  meaning,  “to  beguile  thoroughly/wholly,”  is  that  of  personal 
intent which goes deeper than the personification of sin. In other words, it is 
Satan who conspires to mislead, after the manner of the serpent in Gen. 3:1, 
13  (cf.  II  Cor.  11:3;  I  Tim.  2:14,  where  the  same  Greek  word  is  used).  The 
commandment,  “You  shall  not  eat  from  it  or  touch  it  [the  tree  of  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil],”  was  used  by  the  serpent  when  he  deceitfully 
suggested  to  Eve  that  in  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  she  could  be  “like  God” 
(Gen. 3:5). The law, although impotent according to its essential character, is 
yet an innocent tool that is satanically used to delude man into thinking that 
by this means he may attain life and righteousness. However, this supposed 
                                                
22
  Supported by Augustine, Calvin, Haldane, Hodge, Luther, Murray, Owen. 
23
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 439. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  212
deliverer  snaps  back  to  savagely  devour  its  devotee  so  as  to  make  it  a 
slaughtered  victim,  evicted  from  the  garden  of  Eden  and  fellowship  with 
God. 
So,  as  Lloyd-Jones  writes:  “Sin  does  this  work,  as  Paul  says  in  Ephesians 
4:17,  by  ‘darkening  our  understanding’.  It  prevents  our  thinking  clearly,  it 
misrepresents  everything;  it  gives  us  rose-tinted  spectacles;  it  perverts 
everything, changes everything, transforms everything.”
24
 
 
b.  Through the law come God’s good, righteous demands, v. 12. 
 
Thus the law of Moses, having been on trial so to speak because of the charge of 
v.  7,  is  thoroughly  vindicated  according  to  its  essence  and  purpose.  It  is  a 
transcript  of  the  righteous  character  of  God  insofar  as  He  requires  us  to  be  like 
him  in  certain  ways  that  relate  to  our  distinctive  creatureliness.  He  does  not 
command  us  to  be  independent,  omnipresent,  omniscient,  omnipotent;  He  does 
command  us  to  be  holy,  faithful,  truthful,  gracious,  etc.  Hence  the  law  remains 
“holy” in that it has been “set apart” by God for a specific purpose, while at the 
same time it reflects the holy character of God (Is. 6:3). Clearly the fulness of the 
Mosaic law has elements that are linked  in time with the distinctive applicability 
of  this  code  to  Israel;  yet  this  Jewish  outer  framework  contains  the  unchanging 
core  of  the  nature  of  God.  The  law  remains  “righteous  [just]”  in  that  its  proper 
administration  or  working,  according  to  its  purpose,  is  equitable  and  fair,  never 
partisan.  The  law  remains  “good”  in  that  it  is  morally  pure  and  profitable  for 
man, even as the tenth “commandment” represents.  
Such a declaration does not in any way detract from the fact that the Christian is 
“not under law but under grace” (6:14), has “died to the law” 7:4), or has been 
“released  from  the  law”  (7:6);  however  it  does  eliminate  any  charge  that  man’s 
problem  is  due  to  the  fault  of  the  law,  or  indeed  God,  even  if  that  law  was 
misused  by  sin.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  8:2-3,  the  believer  will  be 
informed that he has been “set free from the law of sin and death,” that “the law 
was  weak  through  the  flesh,”  and  that  a  new  “law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus”  has  supplanted  the  Mosaic  administration.  The  old  code  remains  “holy, 
just, and good” in its heart and setting, yet “Christians [ought] never to return to 
the  law  —  whether  Mosaic  or  any  other  list  of  ‘rules’  —  as  a  source  of  spiritual 
vigor and growth.”
25
 
 
 
C.  THE FRUITLESS ROLE OF THE LAW IN SANCTIFICATION, VS. 13-25. 
 
Paul now reverts back to his concern that the law is unproductive regarding sanctification in 
the life of the Christian even if the regenerate soul agrees with its essential goodness. While 
he again speaks of it as “good” and “spiritual” in vs. 13-14, 16, thus reiterating the thought 
of v. 12, yet he returns to the dark side of the law insofar as, unlike Jesus Christ, it does not 
produce  righteousness,  but  rather  is  “the  law  of  sin  and  death”  and  “weak  through  the 
flesh,”  vs.  23,  25;  8:2-3.  Thus  the  key  terms  that  must  be  distinctly  understood  here  are, 
                                                
24
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 7, p. 160. 
25
  Moo, Epistle to the Romans, p. 441. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  213
first“law,”  then  “sin/evil,”  “I/ego/inner  man,”  and  “flesh/body/members,”  especially  with 
regard  to  their  usage  up  to  this  point.  Note  that  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
mentioned here until v. 25, and the Holy Spirit until 8:2.  
That the Apostle describes in this section the realm of his present experience is maintained 
for the following reasons. 1. The conflict of vs. 14-25 is paralleled by Galatians 5:17 which 
appears to describe Christian conflict. 2. The present tense emphasis of vs. 14-25 indicates 
the  likelihood  that  Paul  refers  to  his  Christian  experience.
26
  3.  Paul’s  religious  experience 
before his conversion seems proud and confident (Gal. 1:13-14; Phil. 3:4-6), while here his 
soul seems in a turmoil. 4. The preceding context of 5:1-7:7 addresses the sanctification of 
the believer. 5. The triumphant cry of v. 25, surely that of a believer, yet describes the mind 
serving the law of God while the flesh serves the law of sin. 6. The inner man is repeatedly 
described  as  being  inclined,  according  to  heart  and  will,  toward  the  law  of  God  and  the 
good. The chief objection to this perspective,
27
 which sees Paul as describing an unregenerate 
seeker, concerns the seeming less than victorious reign of sin as described in vs. 14, 19, 21, 
24-25,  and  this  matter  will  be  dealt  with  in  subsequent  comments.
28
  Lloyd-Jones  rightly 
declares  concerning  v.  14:  “‘I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin’.  We  have  here  what  is,  in  many 
ways,  the  key  statement  of  the  whole  of  this  section;  .  .  .  all  the  commentators  are  agreed 
that this is the most significant statement in the whole section.” 
 
1.  The right role of the law restated, v. 13. 
 
While  this  verse,  with  its  three  “aorist  tense”  verbs  that  are  the  last  of  this  chapter, 
expands  upon  the  cumulative  truth  of  vs.  7-12,  yet  the  importance  of  its  connection 
with v. 14 requires that it be more closely associated with the repetitive “present tense” 
truth that is now about to be set forth. Again Paul is emphatic, as in vs. 7-8, that the 
law  is  essentially  “good”  even  though  he  will  continue  to  maintain  that  it  is 
functionally  weak.  Now  he  denies  that  the  law  is  responsible  for  punitive  death,  let 
alone  that  it  is  intrinsically  sin  and  thus  evil.  The  challenge  here  may  be  the  thought, 
“Well,  if  the  law  is  not  evil  in  itself,  yet  it  certainly  was  responsible  for  my 
condemnation to death!”  
But  Paul  again  responds,  “No.”  Rather,  the  culprit  remains  to  be  “sin,”  that 
manipulative  foe  previously  described  as  using  the  law  as  an  innocent  tool  so  as  to 
“slay” sin’s victim, vs. 8-9. So here sin delights to use the law so that the sinner might 
recognize his “exceeding sinfulness” and consequently be subject to an unwitting agent 
of  death  through  condemnation.  Thus  the  law,  while  not  in  any  way  being  culpable 
with  regard  to  sinful  man’s  mortal  condition  and  destiny,  is  sin’s  x-ray  machine, 
magnifying  glass,  and  scalpel,  whereby  the  human  cancerous  soul  is  exposed  in  all  of 
its ugliness so that the patient is brought to utter despair and the only hope of death. 
Hence  the  concluding  emphasis  of  this  verse  reiterates  Paul’s  perception  of  the  law  as 
being  analytical,  diagnostic,  and  informative,  not  remedial  and  sanctifying.  Further, 
                                                
26
  Lloyd-Jones rejects this proof on the grounds that Paul is here using “the dramatic present” that can in fact 
refer  to  a  past  event.  While  this  may  be  a  possibility,  yet  the  surrounding  and  predominant  use  of  the 
common  temporal  present,  especially  in  contrast  with  the  prior  aoristic  emphases  of  vs.  8-11,  makes  his 
suggestion improbable. Romans, An Exposition Of Chapter 7, pp. 183-4.  
27
  Supported by Augustine, Luther, Calvin, Bunyan, Owen, Haldane, Hodge, Shed, Morris, Murray, Cranfield, 
Packer, and rejected by Wesley, Sunday and Bedlam, Lloyd-Jones, Moo.  
28
  For an excellent survey of the opposing views here refer to Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 284-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  214
there is obviously the suggestion here that the law, while being good in itself, yet can be 
deceitfully  used  by  sin;  in  this  way  a  Christian  is  deluded  into  believing  that  the  law 
will  encourage  him  to  grow  in  his  spiritual  life,  while  in  fact,  like  a  seeming  tamed 
animal, it suddenly rises up to devour the one who holds it close to his breast. It is this 
thought in particular that readies us to understand the truth of v. 14. 
 
2.  The work of the law in relationship to the flesh, vs. 14-20. 
 
The  ensuing  conflict  is  perhaps  best  understood  if  we  ask  ourselves  whether,  apart 
from  this  passage,  any  other  parts  of  Paul’s  writings  include  a  somewhat  parallel 
account. Surely our response here must be positive. Consider Romans 13:14 where the 
exhortation, obviously addressed to the believer, implicitly understands the propensity 
of  the  flesh  to  militantly  lust  against  the  Christ  clothed  new  man.  As  a  result,  in  I 
Corinthians 9:26-27 Paul declares, “I discipline [rigorously control] my body and make 
it my slave [rather than my master].” Then in Galatians 5:16-17, the tension here in the 
believer, which Luther associates with Rom. 7:14, 23-4,
29
 is similarly described as being 
between the Spirit controlled new man and his rebellious vehicle of flesh, as Colossians 
3:5  likewise  suggests.  Also  consider  the  “groaning”  of  Romans  8:23;  II  Corinthians 
5:2-4.  Thus  we  remind  ourselves  that,  according  to  our  study  of  Romans  6:6,  the 
implicit revelation of the new man is set against the tyranny and vanquished power of 
“our body of sin.” Here the same biblical dualism is described in more profound detail. 
 
a.  The Christian self muses about the law and his flesh, vs. 14-16. 
 
The  connection  here  with  v.  13  concerns  the  innocent  holiness  and  sin  exposing 
character  of  the  law,  and  now  a  far  more  intimate  consideration  of  how  sin, 
inherent in the flesh, uses this law to arouse sin in the believer to an excruciatingly 
disturbing level, sans any gracious remedy.    
 
(1)  The law and corrupt flesh by definition, v. 14. 
 
 “For we know,” in itself suggests that Paul expects his Christian audience to 
appreciate, almost as an axiom now readily accepted, that what he is about 
to say concerns their present common experience. 
 
(a)  The spirituality of the law. 
 
Obviously  the  “spirituality”  of  the  law  wraps  together  the  aspects  of 
“holiness,”  “righteousness,”  and  “goodness”  described  in  v.  12,  yet 
there  are  shades  of  II  Tim.  3:16  here  as  well.  The  law  has  come  from 
God, and thus it is Spirit generated; it has an impeccable character.  
 
(b)  The believer’s carnality under the law. 
 
But when the law is used by sin in the flesh, then this self-condemnation 
is  to  be  expected.  What  is  meant  by  Paul  being  s£rkinoj,  sarkinos, 
here?  This  is  a  vital  matter.  The  word  means  “composed  of  flesh;” 
                                                
29
  Martin Luther, A Commentary on St. Paul’s Epistle To The Galatians, p. 502. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  215
Goodspeed’s  translation  of  “physical”  is  probably  best  here  while  the 
NIV having “unspiritual” is probably the worst.
30
 Some make much of 
the  parallel  of  spirit/flesh  here  with  spirit/flesh  in  I  Corinthians  3:1-3, 
where  Paul’s  addresses  weak  believers,  so  that  “flesh”  here  means 
“carnal person.” It is this understanding that introduces problems here 
in understanding v. 14. To be “carnal” in Corinth was not the same as 
here  being  “composed  of  flesh.”
31
  Rather,  the  related  terminology  and 
overall  picture  of  Romans  6:6,  12-13,  19;  7:5,  23-24,  concerning  our 
“body  of  sin,”  “mortal  body,”  bodily  “members,”  “body  of  this 
death,” etc. seems far more determinative in that Paul here is primarily 
describing  the  physical  body,  as  Luther  affirms  commenting  on  6:6.
32
 
Lloyd-Jones  objects  to  this  interpretation  since  Paul  is  saying  that  “I” 
am  carnal  here  as  opposed  to  “my  body  is  carnal.”  But  vs.  16,  18 
indicate  that  the  Apostle  can  describe  “I/himself”  as  “carnal”  when  in 
fact  he  means  “my  flesh.”  In  other  words,  the  bodily  component  of  a 
Christian,  as  sinfully  impregnated,  constitutes  the  believer  as  being 
carnal.
33
 Thus the exposure of the law to this carnal realm will stimulate 
a sense of sin, personal corruption, and groaning. 
 
(c)  The believer’s captivity under the law.  
 
Paul’s  confession  that  he  is  “sold  in  bondage  to  sin”  in  an  expanded 
form  means  “having  been  sold  over  to  ownership  and  dominion  by 
sin.” So it is the absolute sense here that causes Moo to write that this 
statement,  “clinches  the  argument  for  a  description  of  a  non-Christian 
here.”
34
 Lloyd-Jones argues at length for a similar opinion.”
35
 However, 
it  is  significant  that  Moo  defines  “body”  in  6:6,  12-13  as  “the  whole 
person.”  Certainly  if  “the  whole  person”  here  is  “sold  in  bondage  to 
sin,”  then  a  seeming  insuperable  problem  arises  with  regard  to  that 
same  person  being  a  Christian.
36
  However,  if  it  is  the  believer  as 
                                                
30
  Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 290. 
31
  James Fraser, A Treatise On Sanctification, pp. 270-1; also Murray, Romans, I, pp. 259-50. 
32
  “Therefore the term ‘body of sin’ ought not be understood as something mystical, as many people do who 
imagine  that  ‘body  of  sin’  refers  to  a  whole  mountain  of  evil  works,  but  rather  it  refers  to  this  very  body 
which we are carrying around. It is called the ‘body of sin’ because it inclines against the spirit and toward 
sin. And the seed of the devil dwells in it.” Martin Luther, Works, “Lectures On Romans,” V. 25, p. 314; 
also Theodore Zahn. 
33
  Let it be emphasized here that “carnal” or being “composed of flesh” must be understood according to 6:6, 
“our body of sin.” That is, the body and its members are polluted with sin (7:18, 23, 25). Notice here in v. 
14  that  it  is  the  flesh  that  is  in  bondage  to  sin.  Thus  pure  material  flesh  is  not  intrinsically  evil,  yet  it  is, 
according to the fall, spiritually diseased and subject to dissolution. Concerning Ephesians 6:12 where Paul 
declares that, “our struggle is not against flesh and blood,” the context suggests conflict with external foes 
that are spiritual in nature, and not “mere frail men (Gal. 1:16), with all their physical and mental infirmities 
(respectively I Cor. 15:50 and Matt. 16:17). William Hendriksen, Ephesians, p. 272. 
34
  Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 454. 
35
  Lloyd-Jones,  Romans,  An  Exposition  Of  Chapter  7,  pp.  176-257.  He  denies  Paul  is  describing  either  the 
regenerate or unregenerate state, but rather a person in transition and partially awakened, being troubled by 
the law and near conversion.  
36
  Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, pp. 375, 382-4. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  216
“composed  of  flesh”  who  is  “sold  in  bondage  to  sin,”  then  such 
captivity is not necessarily to be attributed to the Christian “new man.” 
Further,  the  following  tension  between  the  “I”  that  wants  to  do  the 
good as opposed to what “sin does” vs. 19-23, makes v. 14 consistently 
explicable.  So  Luther  comments  on  Galatians  5:17  (cf.  Ps.  38:1-10; 
Matt. 26:41; Rom. 8:23; I Cor. 9:26-27; Heb. 12:1): 
Here  [and  Rom.  7:14,  23-4],  not  only  the  schoolmen,  but  also  some  of 
the  old  fathers,  are  much  troubled,  seeking  how  they  may  excuse  Paul. 
For  it  seemeth  unto  them  absurd  and  unseemly  to  say,  that  that  elect 
vessel of Christ should have sin. But we credit Paul’s own words, wherein 
he plainly confesseth that he is sold under sin, and that he is led captive 
of sin, that he hath a law in his members rebelling against him, and that 
in  the  flesh  he  serveth  the  law  of  sin.  Here  again  they  answer,  that  the 
Apostle  speaketh  in  the  person  of  the  ungodly.  But  the  ungodly  do  not 
complain of the rebellion of their flesh, of any battle or conflict, or of the 
captivity  and  bondage  of  sin:  for  sin  mightily  reigneth  in  them.  This  is 
therefore the very complaint of Paul and of all the saints
37
  
Again,  it  needs  to  be  stated,  as  John  Stott  confirms,
38
  that  the  law  in 
particular  causes  the  believer  to  make  such  a  cry  of  anguish  since  it  is 
such  an  able  stimulant  of  sinful  flesh,  which  is  the  point  that  v.  13 
reminded us about. 
 
(2)  The law arouses the corrupt flesh, v. 15. 
 
The  axiom  of  v.  14  having  been  established,  particularly  a  distinction 
between Paul as the representative “I” and his “sinful flesh,” there is now an 
invitation  for  the  Christian  to  inwardly  reflect  upon  how  the  law,  given  its 
earlier  defined  role  in  vs.  7-13,  impacts  upon  his  life  as  a  new  person  in 
Christ who yet inhabits a corrupt mortal body. 
The “I/flesh” conflict is mysterious, frustrating and paradoxical. Exposed to 
the  law,  as  v.  16  suggests,  there  arise  conflicting  responses.  As  the  law  is 
comprehended,  the  “I”  approves  of  its  positive  and  negative  moral 
imperatives  and  disapproves  of  its  opposites.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sinful 
body  naturally  acts  in  opposition  to  these  imperatives  and  pursues  that 
which is unlawful. More specifically, if I pursue sanctification by looking to 
the  law,  while  I  may  admire  the  holiness  that  is  commanded,  yet  that  very 
law  stimulates  the  “sinful  flesh”  so  that  it  rises  up  in  active  opposition  to 
that  which  the  “I”  approves.  Thus  my  actions  surprise  me  since  they  are  in 
opposition to the desires of my heart that is alive unto God. Therefore such 
perplexity  calls  for  careful  analysis  and  understanding  on  the  part  of  the 
Christian.  What  needs  to  be  grasped  is  that,  as  with  vs.  8,  11-13,  the  real 
                                                
37
  Luther, Commentary on Galatians, p. 502. 
38
  “The right way of applying Romans 7-8 is to recognize that some church-goers today might be termed ‘Old 
Testament  Christians’.  The  contradiction  implied  in  this  expression  indicates  what  an  anomaly  they  are. 
They show signs of new birth in their love for the church and the Bible, yet their salvation is law, not gospel; 
flesh, not Spirit; the ‘oldness’ of slavery to rules and regulations, not the ‘newness’ of freedom through Jesus 
Christ.  They  are  like  Lazarus  when  he  first  emerged  from  the  tomb,  alive  but  still  bound  hand  and  foot. 
They need to add to their life liberty. John Stott, The Message of Romans, p. 210.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  217
culprit  here  is  “the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members,”  and  not  “the  law 
[that] is good,” v. 16.  
 
(3)  The law is approved by the dominant new self, v. 16. 
 
The conditional or “if” sentence here assumes the overall premise to be true. 
Hence, “Since I find myself [that is my body of sinful flesh] doing that which 
I [the new self] do not approve of, then in fact I [my body of sinful flesh] is 
the culprit doing that which I [the new self] disapprove of!” Thus the focus 
moves from the law’s impeccable character, even if a carnal stimulant, to the 
resultant tension that now results between the flesh and the new self. It is as 
if  the  law,  albeit  good,  has  been  used  to  stimulate  an  argument,  and  then 
draws back to let the disputants fight it out, as vs. 17-20 relate. 
What is this acknowledgment by the new self that “the law is good”? It is the 
ready acknowledgment that the law, though functionally weak as 8:3 plainly 
states, is yet essentially holy; that is the law is morally pure and unsullied; it 
is just and beneficial in its prescriptions.; it is in no way a willing accomplice 
in carnal crime! 
 
b.  The Christian self muses about himself and his flesh, vs. 17-20. 
 
Here a great depth of somber, agonizing self-contemplation is reached; and while 
the law is not specifically mentioned, yet its distinctive ministry of condemnation 
underlies  the  whole  of  the  introspective  conflict  thus  described.  For  while  8:3-4 
describes, “what the law could not do [in terms of producing the righteousness of 
the law], weak as it was through the flesh,” here we observe what the law can do 
as a stimulus to sinful flesh. There also needs to be a reminder of the conspicuous 
absence  here  of  mention  concerning  the  indwelling  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  we  are 
presently considering a more deficient form of Christian sanctification.
39
 It is that 
condition whereby an authentic Christian is deceived by attempting to use the law 
as  a  means  of  attaining  spiritual  maturity  (Gal.  3:1-3).  Paul  could  presently 
understand,  drawing  from  earlier  experience,  the  soul-chilling  effect  of  such  a 
focus.  This  is  not  at  all  meant  to  subscribe  here  to  a  “carnal  Christian” 
perspective.  At  any  time  a  mature  believer  may  descend  to  this  appreciation  of 
himself as a “wretched man,” and the law will ably help him in this plunge. But 
surely Paul does not teach that he must be perpetually locked into this focus? It is 
undeniable  that  Romans  8:1-17  describes  a  contrasting  ascent  of  the  smitten, 
redeemed  soul  to  a  more  blessed  plain  where,  “the  mind  set  on  the  Spirit  is  life 
and peace” v. 6. 
 
 
                                                
39
  John  Stott  writes:  “Many  commentators  have  paid  insufficient  attention  to  what  Bishop  Handley  Moule 
called ‘this absolute and eloquent silence’ in Romans 7 about the Holy Spirit. He is mentioned only in verse 
6.  Since  that  verse  characterizes  the  Christian  era  as  the  age  of  the  Spirit,  one  would  have  expected  this 
chapter to be full of the Spirit. Instead, Romans 7 is full of the law (mentioned, with its synonyms, thirty-one 
times). It is Romans 8 which is full of the Spirit (mentioned twenty-one times) and which calls the indwelling 
of the Spirit the authenticating mark of belonging to Christ (8:9). If then we are looking for a description of 
the normal Christian life we will find it in Romans 8; Romans 7, with its concentration on the law and its 
omission of the Spirit, cannot be held to describe Christian normality.” Ibid., pp. 208-9.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  218
(1)  “I” do not do what law-aroused “sinful flesh” does, v. 17. 
 
The  temporal  emphasis  here,  “Now,  no  longer  am  I  [the  new  self]  the  one 
working it [that which I hate],” implies a former unconverted state when the 
old  self  was  working  in  agreeable  conjunction  with  the  overtures  of  sinful 
flesh;  but  now  any  evil  intent  and  lawlessness  is  caused  by  sin  that  inhabits 
my  fleshly  body.  Thus  sin  is  again  personified  and  described  as  the 
corrupting  guest  that  defiles  the  residence,  and  offends  and  propositions  its 
owner!  But  is  this  an  escape  from  responsibility  concerning  personal  sin? 
Cannot  the  believer,  in  antinomian  fashion,  be  unconcerned  about  personal 
sin  because,  “I  [the  new  self]  am  not  doing  it,  but  rather  it  is  my  detached 
body of sin”? Consider this reasoning through to v. 20.        
   
(2)  “I” am willing to do good in opposition to law-aroused “rebellious flesh,” v. 
18. 
 
With  greater  clarity,  description  continues  of  the  biblical  dualism  that 
distinguishes  between  soul  and  body  in  the  Christian.  Paul’s  body  of  sinful 
flesh is wholly corrupt and rebellious, yet implicit is the truth that something 
“good” does inhabit this carcass, and that obviously is the “new self.” Thus 
the tension is described as between the inclination of the “new self” toward 
“the good” and the disinclination of the body to perform “the good.” What 
is “the good”? Two different Greek words are used here. Paul’s body is void 
of  “[essential]  good”  ¥gaqoj,  agathos,  and  it  is  not  disposed  to  doing  “the 
[noble,  praiseworthy]  good,”  tÕ  kalÒn,  to  kalon,  both  of  which  related 
qualities are derived from God (Ps. 118:29; Mark 10:17-18). 
 
(3)  “I” am in active conflict with law-aroused “sinful flesh,” v. 19. 
 
The  polarization  that  the  Christian  endures  is  now  clarified  as  a  conflict 
between  “good”  ¥gaqoj,  agathos,  and  “evil,”  kakÒj,  kakos,  but  more 
particularly “good as opposed to evil desire” and “actual [not possible] evil 
practice.”  In  other  words,  agreeable  contemplation  of  the  law  and  its 
essential  goodness  yet  results  in  the  stimulation  of  sinful  flesh.  The 
frustration  is  like  that  of  a  person  with  an  itchy  rash;  the  temptation  is  to 
scratch  the  irritation,  though  the  result  is  greater  itching.  What  is  really 
needed  is  a  healing  balm.  But  why  does  the  flesh  here  seem  to  dominate  in 
terms  of  evil  being  actually  practiced,  in  spite  of  good  desires?  Because  the 
law is incapable of producing righteousness, as 8:3 plainly indicates; the law 
in  fact  scratches  the  sinful  flesh  only  to  make  it  more  irritated  and  active. 
Contemplation  of  the  law  for  the  purpose  of  practicing  the  good,  though 
with the best of intentions, is utterly deceitful, and just as counterproductive 
as  the  thought  of  scratching  an  infectious  itch;  the  thought  may  seem 
reasonable,  but  the  result  is  greater  irritation.  The  only  healing  balm  is  the 
soul  sanctifying  Spirit  of  grace  which  is  productive  of  life  and  peace  in  the 
mind (6:14; 8:6; Heb. 13:9). 
 
 
 
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  219
(4)  “I” am not deceived by the doing of law-aroused “sinful flesh,” v. 20. 
 
Another “if” clause assumes the premise to be true. “Since I [my sinful body 
of flesh] is doing the evil that I [the new self] disapprove of, then I [the new 
self] am not the active perpetrator of this sin that inheres within and erupts 
by  means  of  my  body.”  So  through  vs.  17-20,  this  dualism  could  be 
understood as justification of avoided responsibility.” Murray responds:  
The following propositions are clearly implied. (1) The flesh is wholly sinful—
no good thing dwells in it. (2) The flesh is still associated with his person—the 
flesh is his flesh and it is in him. (3) Sin is also associated with his person, for it 
is  in  his  flesh  that  sin  inheres.  Hence  verse  17  [and  vs.  18-20]  cannot  be 
interpreted as a disavowal of responsibility for the sin that dwells in him or for 
the sin committed in frustration of his determinate will.
40
 
Further,  the  purpose  of  Paul  needs  to  be  kept  in  mind  here,  namely  the 
situation envisaged as to what happens when the Christian resorts to the law 
for  sanctification;  in  such  a  scenario,  the  question  of  responsibility  is  not  a 
matter that Paul is concerned about. 
 
3.  The work of the law in conflict with the “new self”, vs. 21-25. 
 
In  this  conclusion  of  his  thesis,  Paul  explicitly  reverts  to  the  distinctive  roll  of  “the 
[Mosaic]  law  of  God,”  although  nÒmoj,  nomos,  used  seven  times  in  these  five  verses, 
takes on additional meanings.  
 
a.  The law of God and “the new self,” v. 21. 
 
This is acknowledged to be one of the most difficult verses to interpret in Romans. 
The  NASB  commences,  “I  find  then  the  principle  that  evil  is  present  with  me,” 
while the NKJV reads, “I find then a law, that evil is present with me.” Yet “the 
principle” or “a law” is Ð nÒmoj, ho nomos, more probably referring to “the law 
[of  Moses].”
41
  Thus  H.  C.  G.  Moule  gives  a  good  literal  translation  as  follows: 
“So then I find the Law, with me willing to do what is good, [I find, I say,] that 
with  me  what  is  evil  is  present.”
42
  Here  the  Christian  persists  in  seeking 
sanctification through the supposed encouragement of the law, and an element of 
deception is present in that the inner appreciation of the law’s essential goodness 
leads him to believe that he must surely be on the right track. The only problem is 
that  strong  solicitation  to  evil  is  present,  even  increasingly  so  as  the  law  is 
pursued.  Hence  the  law  appears  to  be  admirable;  its  purity  is  glorious,  most 
desirable,  especially  according  to  the  diseased;  yet  their  malignancy  only  finds 
encouragement, not healing. 
 
 
 
                                                
40
  Murray, Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 263. 
41
  The articular Ð nÒmoj, ho nomos, is the predominant and frequent expression in ch. 7 here, and the context, 
especially as paralleled in v. 22, strongly suggests that the definite article should be emphasized. 
42
  H. C. G. Moule, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans, p. 133. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  220
b.  The law of God and the conquest of man v. 22-25. 
 
The remainder of Paul’s argument concerning misguided appreciation of the role 
of  the  law  is  portrayed  as  a  battle,  or  a  “Holy  War”  so  to  speak.  The  conflict 
described in the preceding vs. 17-20 is now illustrated, using military metaphors, 
in parallel with Galatians 5:17-18. 
 
(1)  The vocal cry of the inner man that brings rejoicing, v. 22. 
 
 “For  I  muse  with  inward  delight  in  the  law  of  God  according  to  the  inner 
man.” Most likely, in the light of v. 22, a broad understanding of “law” is in 
mind  here  that  certainly  incorporates  the  Mosaic  code.  Of  course  this 
enjoyment  must  be  within  the  parameters  of  the  right  use  of  the  law  as 
described  by  Paul  (3:19-20;  4:15;  7:7;  I  Tim.  1:8-10),  since  he  also  warns 
concerning  the  misuse  of  the  law  (Acts  13:39;  Rom.  8:3).  As  a  Jew  in 
particular,  Paul  reverently  appreciates  that  the  law  has  come,  uncorrupted, 
from  the  mouth  of  God,  and  thus  is  “holy  .  .  .  righteous  .  .  .  good  .  .  . 
spiritual,” vs. 12, 14. Thus Paul can happily reflect on the character of God 
revealed  in  the  law,  as  well  as  its  ability  to  cause  men  to  understand  their 
bankruptcy  as  thorough  sinners.  The  law  is  excellent  as  a  “ministry  of 
condemnation  [having  fading  glory]”  (II  Cor.  3:9-11).  While  Paul  could  be 
said to appreciate that “the law leads to grace,” yet he never speaks in terms 
of “the grace of law.”
43
  
 
(2)  The vexed cry of the smitten man that brings captivity, v. 23. 
 
This  complex  statement  restates  the  dichotomy  of  vs.  14-21  except  that  the 
“inner man” of v. 22 is now described as “the law of my mind,” that is the 
“renewed  mind”  12:2.The  Christian  then  is  not  a  spiritual  schizophrenic 
having  two  egos  designated  as  an  old  man  and  a  new  man.  Rather  he  is  a 
new man, a singular regenerate ego, that, while highly esteeming the law of 
God, at the same time finds an opposing law arising that is intrinsic to “the 
members  of  his  body;”  it  is  “the  law  of  sin  in  his  bodily  members”  cf.  6:6, 
that  is  a  principle  natural  to  all  of  Adam’s  race.  Indeed  it  would  seem  that, 
based  on  v.  8,  the  law  of  God  that  is  so  admirable  yet  at  the  same  time  is 
used by sin to arouse conflict, even “wage war against the law of his mind.” 
Thus sin in the flesh assails the ramparts of Paul’s spiritually renewed mind; 
in spite of his high regard for the good law of God, Paul has a raging battle 
that, should he continue to look to the law of God, will lead to his captivity. 
In other words, to look to the law in neglect of gospel grace will lead to sin 
overwhelming  the  regenerate  soul.  This  man,  while  recognizing  the  good  in 
                                                
43
  Ernest Kevan’s The Grace Of Law is an excellent study of Puritan theology. In the Foreword he comments: 
“The  title  of  this  book  may  seem  to  require  justification,  but  it  is  my  hope  that  this  has  been  sufficiently 
provided  in  the  substance  of  the  work,”  p.  14.  The  overall  argument,  derived  from  systematic  Covenant 
Theology, is reasoned as follows: “This subservient aim of the Law [in driving sinners to Christ according to 
Galatians 3:24] means that the Law is nothing less than the Divinely-appointed instrument of grace,” p. 125. 
However, especially in Paul’s writings, there simply is no such plainly stated synthesis. For all of his love of 
the law, yet the Apostle frequently and passionately distinguishes the antithetical and subordinate role of the 
law with regard to grace.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  221
the law, is yet impoverished and lacking in appropriate defense, that is gospel 
accouterment  and  union  with  Christ  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  cry  of  v. 
24 is that of a man taken captive by sin through the law; such imprisonment 
is that of a Christian who is looking in the wrong direction for the keeping of 
his saved soul. 
 
(3)  The vanquished cry of the wretched man in captivity, v. 24. 
 
Now Paul admits to incarceration that inevitably results from his infatuation 
with  the  law  of  God;  he  postulates  his  status  as  a  Christian  who,  although 
saved  by  the  gospel,  yet  has  suffered  from  a  flirtatious  relationship  with 
Moses  in  neglect  of  the  gospel,  which  wrong  bigamous  relationship  is 
excluded in 7:1-4. The cry, “O wretched man [assailed new man?] that I am” 
concerns  this  believer’s  misery  and  agony  that  consumes  his  regenerate  soul 
or  ego,  with  regard  to  longed  for  “emancipation  from  the  body  of  this 
death,”  that  is  “the  law  of  sin  in  my  members”  according  to  v.  23.  This 
tormented  saint  yearns  for  deliverance,  expressed  in  the  future  tense  of 
·Úomai, rhuomai; cf. 11:26 where Christ is “the Deliverer” of “all Israel.”  
However,  surely  this  pathetic  cry,  though  emanating  from  a  mature 
believer,
44
  is  not  to  be  understood  as  that  of  a  triumphant  child  of  God; 
rather  we  have  here  the  expressed  pain  of  a  soul  lashed  by  the  merciless 
aggravation  of  the  law!  Yet,  even  for  the  man  who  rejoices  in  the  balm  of 
gospel  grace  there  remain  the  distressing  overtures  of  the  flesh  so  that 
“groaning”  continues  as  a  periodic  response  (8:23;  II  Cor.  5:4,  8).  In  our 
earthly  pilgrimage  the  flesh  remains  a  perennial  problem  for  all  believers; 
nevertheless, the greatest relief will come from the application of an ointment 
called “the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” rather than flagellation by 
means of “the law of sin and of death” (8:2-3). 
In  John  Bunyan’s  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress  this  principle  is  well  illustrated. 
Faithful  describes  to  Christian  his  encounter  with  aged  Adam  the  First, 
representing the flesh and the old man (6:6; Eph. 4:22; Col. 3:9), who offers 
him  his  three  daughters  in  marriage,  the  Lust  of  the  Flesh,  the  Lust  of  the 
Eyes,  and  the  Pride  of  Life.  At  first,  in  a  moment  of  carnality,  Faithful  is 
inclined to accept this proposal; then he roundly spurns it only to be pinched 
in  his  flesh  by  the  old  man  so  that  he  cries  out  in  pain,  “O  wretched  man 
that  I  am!”  Then  Adam  the  First  sends  an  assailant  after  Christian,  in  fact 
Moses,  who  beats  the  pilgrim  to  the  ground  and  continues  to  batter  him. 
Though  Christian  cries  out  for  mercy,  Moses  declares,  “I  know  not  how  to 
show  mercy.”  Then  another  man  comes  who  beats  of  Moses,  and  he  is 
recognized  on  account  of  “the  holes  in  his  hands”!
45
  The  point  here  is  that 
the  remedy  for  carnality  and  the  anguish  of  guilt  in  the  Christian  is  not 
Moses but Christ.     
 
                                                
44
  He  is  mature  in  his  self-analysis  and  appreciation  of  the  law  even  though,  for  a  time,  he  has  become 
entangled  with  the  law;  legalism  could  easily  ensnare  Peter  (Gal.  2:11-14)  who  had  earlier  confessed  his 
commitment to the gospel of grace for Jew and Gentile (Acts 15:11). 
45
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, III, pp. 118-9. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  222
(4)  The victorious cry of the liberated man through Jesus Christ, v. 25. 
 
The opening exultant response here may well be better joined to v. 24 so that 
the subsequent comment, appearing as enigmatic to some, might stand alone 
as a conclusion that is more related to the whole issue of dualism introduced 
at v. 13. 
 
(a)  The triumph of the grace of God through Jesus Christ, v. 25a. 
 
Since  v.  4,  the  name  of  Christ  has  not  been  mentioned  until  here,  and 
thus it is right to conclude that a whole new emphasis is about to dawn. 
Thus we might expand in paraphrase this tone of hope as follows: “Let 
free  acknowledgment  be  given  that  God  alone,  through  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  delivers  from  that  captivity  which  the  law  ruthlessly  secures.”
46
 
But is Paul here describing a present gospel oriented deliverance, or that 
which is the believer’s future, victorious, consummate hope when “this 
mortal [body] must put on immortality” (I Cor. 15:53, 57; II Cor. 5:4), 
or both? The answer here must surely arise from four conclusions that 
have  been  deduced  from  the  text  thus  far.  First,  consideration  of  the 
triumphant reign of grace revealed in 5:15-21, having been interrupted 
in  chapters  6-7  by  several  challenges  to  this  truth,  is  now  about  to  be 
resumed  in  8:1-25.  Second,  Paul  has  described  his  own  Christian 
experience,  and  this  verse  adds  considerable  weight  to  this  opinion. 
Third, he continues to deal with conflict that arises when the Christian 
attempts to be sanctified by means of the law, and this verse, along with 
the  explicit  legal  references  in  8:2-7,  makes  this  point  undeniable. 
Fourth, it follows then that the cry of v. 24 refers to desired rescue from 
the misery of the overwhelming struggle that has been considered from 
v.  13;  in  other  words  the  yearned  for  deliverance  concerns  a  legal 
conflict and not simply carnality in general; again, 8:2-7 seems to make 
this exceedingly clear. 
Admittedly,  many  commentators  have  exclusively  understood  this 
expression  of  triumphant  hope  as  a  confident  declaration  of  future 
emancipation  from  this  corrupt  body  of  flesh  at  the  day  of 
resurrection.
47
  Yet  the  connected  contrast  with  chapter  8,  while 
undoubtedly  incorporating  this  perspective,  yet  also  appears  to  include 
a present realization of emancipation.
48
 Concerning a future aspect, the 
later  verses  of  chapter  8,  specifically  vs.11,  18-25,  stimulate  hope, 
anticipation  of  the  day  of  resurrection,  “the  redemption  of  our  body,” 
v. 23. However, the future tense of “Who will set me free from the body 
of this death?” in 7:24 surely finds a present realization in the fact that, 
                                                
46
  Murray  is  correct  when  he  concludes  that,  textual  variants  notwithstanding,  “[t]his  is  the  answer  to  the 
question of vs. 24.” Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 269.  
47
  Haldane, Moule, Murray, Pink. 
48
  Morris rightly declares: “Clearly Paul’s words express gratitude for a present deliverance, but it is likely that 
they also have eschatological significance. The deliverance we have today is wonderful, but it is partial and 
incomplete.  It  is  but  a  first  instalment  of  greater  things  to  come,  and  Paul  looks forward  to  that great  day 
with his burst of thanksgiving.” The Epistle to the Romans, p. 297.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE AND THE LAW  223
“the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  has  set  you  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death,”  8:2.
49
  Further,  8:1-10  as  a  whole  appears  to  have  a  present 
emphasis  whereby  “the  requirement  [righteousness]  of  the  Law  might 
be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according 
to the Spirit [of Christ],” v. 4.  
 
(b)  The conflict of the legal mind with the law of sin, v. 25b.  
 
Liberal commentators, being so perplexed by this seeming resignation to 
the  ongoing  dominance  of  the  flesh  that  so  starkly  contrasts  with  the 
prior triumphant declaration juxtaposed in this verse, feel free to amend 
the  text  without  the  slightest  manuscript  justification.
50
  Of  course  such 
arrogant  “scholarship”  is  an  affront  to  the  doctrine  of  biblical 
inspiration. A more literal translation reads: “So then, on the one hand I 
myself,  with  my  mind,  am  serving  the  law  of  God,  but  on  the  other 
hand  with  [my]  flesh  [I  am  serving]  the  law  of  sin.”  Is  therefore  the 
“ego” divided here so that its affections oscillate between the good and 
evil, between the “law of God” and the “law of sin”? Does indeed the 
“new  man”  at  times  act  in  agreement  with  the  flesh?  The  preceding 
context would suggest “no,” especially vs. 17, 20. Hence, the inferential 
“ego” is but a concession to the fact that the flesh is very much a part of 
the  overall  person,  though  strictly  it  is  not  identical  with  the  “I  myself 
with my mind.”
51
 
However  Paul  is  not  saying  that  the  flesh  is  in  reality  regnant  over  his 
redeemed ego, any more than this is the case in Galatians 5:17. What he 
is  saying  is  simply  that  while  there  is  a  measure  of  present  deliverance 
by  means  of  the  reign  of  grace  through  the  Spirit  in  8:1-5,  yet  the 
conflict  is  ongoing  and  heightened  when  the  law  is  sought  as  a  helper; 
there  is  no  present  truce  with  or  final  overthrow  of  the  enemy;  indeed 
sin  is  strengthened  and emboldened  through the  law  when  it  confronts 
the  “new  man.”  The  present  indicative  here  of  douleÚw,  douleuo¯ ,  “to 
serve,” describes the reality of continuous conflict, while the subsequent 
truth of 8:2 prescribes the gospel grounded means of victory over “the 
law of sin and of death,” which here in vs. 25 is “the law of sin.” Thus 
while  v.  25a  has  introduced  us  to  the  glory  of  gospel  sanctification,  v. 
25b  sums  up  the  conflict  that  attempted  legal  sanctification  engenders 
and  has  been  described  in  vs.  13-24.  As  John  Stott  states:  “God’s 
purpose is not that we should be Old Testament Christians, regenerate 
indeed, but living in slavery to the law and in bondage to indwelling sin.  
 
                                                
49
  Here the verb “to set free” is the aorist of ™leuqerÒw, eleutheroo¯ . 
50
  Moo rightly describes this subjective emasculation as, “little more than desperate attempts to make the text 
say what we think it ought to say, when we should be figuring our what it does say.” Epistle to the Romans, 
p. 466n. 
51
  Moule explains: “In strict grammar it [I myself] belongs to both clauses; to the service with the mind and to 
that with the flesh. But remembering how St. Pail has recently dwelt on the Ego as ‘willing’ to obey the will 
of God, it seems best to throw the emphasis, (as we certainly may do in practice,) on the first clause.” Epistle 
of Paul to the Romans,” p. 135. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  224
It  is  rather  that  we  should  be  New  Testament  Christians  who,  having 
died  and  risen  with  Christ,  are  living  in  the  freedom  of  the  indwelling 
Spirit.”
52
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
52
  Stott, Message of Romans, p. 215. 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
ROMANS 8:1-39 – THE REIGN OF GRACE 
THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL 
 
 
uperlatives abound when commentators reflect upon the esteem that has been accorded to this 
eighth  chapter  of  Romans,  and  such  acclaim  is  entirely  justified.  James  Montgomery  Boice 
titles his commentary on this passage, “The Greatest Chapter in the Bible.”
1
 J. I. Packer declares: 
“Now,  as  Romans  is  the  high  peak  of  the  Bible,  so  chapter  8  is  the  high  peak  of  Romans.”
2
 
Keeping in mind Paul’s grand purpose in writing this epistle, which was his intent to heighten the 
addressees’  understanding  of  the  gospel  so  that  both  sanctification  and  assurance  might  result, 
here the pinnacle of such a purpose is reached.  
In appreciating the truth that a right understanding of Romans 8 is gained from first grasping the 
thrust of Romans 1-7, it has become common parlance to speak, agreeably or disagreeably, of the 
thought that the defeated, carnal or legal Christian ought to move from living in Romans 7 to the 
more  victorious  realm  of  living  in  Romans  8.  It  is  certainly  true  that  some  glib  convention 
ministry and perfectionist “higher life” writings have conveyed this idea.
3
  
On the other hand, it is also true that others, in attempting to uphold the normalcy of Romans 7 
for the mature believer, have seemed to become blinded to the obvious triumphant contrast that 
Romans 8 presents.
4
 In simple terms, the determining factor here is the question as to whether the 
believer of 7:24, in crying out “Wretched man that I am,” is responding to a general principle of 
inward carnality or a more specific inflammation of his body of flesh by means of the law.
5
 The 
former  course  perceives  the  contrasting  standards  of  Romans  7  and  8  as  oscillating  normal 
experiences;  the  latter  course  perceives  these  standards  as  contrary  experiences  that  present  a 
preferable standard in Romans 8. This commentary is committed to the latter course as being the 
intent of the biblical text.  
 
 
 
                                              
1
  James Montgomery Boice, Romans, the Reign of Grace, 5-8, pp. 781-88. 
2
  J. I. Packer, Knowing God, p. 232. 
3
  The  Keswick  Convention  movement  originating  from  England  gained  a  reputation  for  this  emphasis  in  its 
regular ministry format of expounding through Romans 5-8. One of its founders, Rev. W. E. Boardman, had 
a perfectionist/holiness bent, and B. B. Warfield quotes him as describing deliverance from the bondage of sin 
“having passed out of the seventh chapter of Romans into the eighth.” Perfectionism, p. 241. 
4
  Arthur Pink writes: “To talk of ‘getting out of Romans 7 into Romans 8’ is excuseless folly. . . . This moan, 
‘O wretched man that I am,’ expresses the normal experience of the Christian, and any Christian who does 
not so moan is in an abnormal and unhealthy state spiritually. The man who does not utter this cry daily is 
either so out of communion with Christ, or so ignorant of the teaching of Scripture, or so deceived about his 
actual condition, that he knows not the corruptions of his own heart and the abject failure of his own life.” 
He  further  declares  that  those  who  disagree  with  him  at  this  point,  or  suggest  a  present  deliverance  is 
included in Romans 7:25a, are influenced by the spirit of Laodiceanism.” The Christian in Romans 7, p. 00. 
5
  It needs to be remembered that this aggravation of “the body of this death,” which is arousal of “the law of 
sin” according to 7:23, finds such stimulation to be in the instrumentality of the law as 7:7-11 has taught and 
8:2-3, 7 confirms. In accepting that Galatians 5:17 presents a parallel with the expressed conflict of 7:24, it 
should be noted that Galatians 5:18 also suggests that this condition is stimulated by the law. 
S 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  226
A.  PRESENT LIBERTY THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF GOSPEL GRACE, VS. 1-17. 
 
  While  the  subject  of  the  law  continues  to  hold  a  place  of  prominence  here  in  vs.  1-8,  and 
thus  could  be  included  as  part  of  the  subject  matter  that  precedes,  as  does  Lloyd-Jones  at 
least in the title of his commentary that covers 7:1-8:4, yet the new triumphant emphasis on 
“the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” in v. 2 leads us to retain the accepted chapter 
break here. 
  Given that Romans 6-7 is parenthetical concerning some objections that Paul addresses with 
regard to the abuse of grace and the role of the law, while Romans 5 and 8 present a degree 
of  continuity,  does  it  follow  that  there  is  no  connection  between  Romans  7  and  8?  Lloyd-
Jones is quite emphatic here when he writes: “You cannot deduce from what Paul has just 
been saying [in chapter 7] that ‘There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in 
Christ  Jesus.’  There  is  no  natural  connection  here.”
6
  However,  this  appears  to  be  an 
astonishing  comment  when  the  following  is  considered.  First,  the  issue  of  the  law  has  not 
concluded at this point even though its last mention in this chapter is 8:7; rather verse 1 here 
directs us to the potency of being “in Christ Jesus” in contrast with the impotency of the law 
in  sanctification  described  in  verse  3.  Second,  the  cry  concerning  felt  “condemnation”  in 
7:24  finds  its  answer  in  “no  condemnation”  in  8:1.  Hence  the  thought  here  of  “no 
condemnation”  focuses  on  the  fact  that  union with  Christ  delivers  from  the  condemnation 
of  the  Law.  Thus  C.  K.  Barrett  comments  concerning  8:1:  “It  is  the  law  that  leads  to 
condemnation,  both  because  sin  fastens  its  grip  upon  man  through  the  law,  and  because 
judgment  takes  place  on  the  basis  of  law.  Christians,  however,  are  dead  to  the  law  and 
therefore  escape  judgment.”
7
  It  is  in  this  regard  that  Augustus  Toplady’s  verse  is  so 
applicable here. 
A debtor to mercy alone, 
   Of covenant mercy I sing; 
Nor fear, with thy righteousness on, 
   My person and offerings to bring. 
The terrors of law and of God 
   With me can have nothing to do; 
My Savior’s obedience and blood 
   Hide all my transgressions from view 
 
1.  There is life in the Spirit of Christ, vs. 1-11. 
 
  It  is  significant  that,  while  in  7:7-25  the  mention  of  life  in  Christ  is  totally  absent,  in 
8:1-13  the  concept  in  general  is  dominant.  Put  another  way,  while  the  doctrine  of 
regeneration  is  absent  in  7:7-25,  it  is  emphasized  in  8:1-13  as  being  especially 
important in terms of the believer’s present sanctified life.   
 
                                              
6
  D. M. Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 7:1-8:4, p. 259. 
7
  C. K. Barrett, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 154. Murray similarly comments at this point: “In this context, . 
. . the apostle is not dealing with justification and the expiatory aspect of Christ’s work but with sanctification 
and  with  what  God  has  done  in  Christ  to  deliver  us  from  the  power  of  sin.  Hence  what  is  thrust  into  the 
foreground  in  the  terms  of  ‘no  condemnation’  is  not  only  freedom  from  guilt  but  also  freedom  from  the 
enslaving  power  of  sin.  If  .  .  .  this  view  of  ‘condemnation’  is  adopted,  then  this  verse,  as  inference,  can  be 
connected  with  what  immediately  precedes,  either  restrictedly  (7:25)  or  more  inclusively  (6:1-7:25).  The 
Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 275. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  227
a.  Walking in the Spirit of Christ, vs. 1-4. 
 
 Focusing  on  the  present,  Paul  transfers  us  from  the  realm  of  legal  dominion  and 
sanctification, the law’s condemnation, carnal arousal, and weakness, to the realm 
of  spiritual  union  with  Christ,  that  is  the  relationship  of  being  “in  Christ”  by 
means of the Spirit. This spiritual realm is a pilgrimage in which the believer is to 
progress toward heaven with a spiritual gait that distinguishes him from a carnal 
style of walking (Gal. 5:16; 25). 
 
(1)  There is no condemnation in Christ, v. 1. 
 
  The KJV includes a segment, identical to that found at the end of v. 4, which 
is  strongly  believed  to  be  a  scribal  addition,  and  thus  is  excluded  from  the 
NASB and NIV. 
 It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  impact  here  of,  as  Morris  puts  it,  “a  different 
atmosphere  from  that  in  chapter  7.”
8
  The  emphatic  conclusion  and  the 
immediacy of “now” both add to the impact. Further, the reintroduction of 
Paul’s  favorite  term  for  union  with  Christ,  that  is  being,  “in  Christ,”  last 
mentioned  in  6:11  as  the  conclusion  of  vs.  1-10,  paves  the  way  for  the 
emphasis of 8:2, 10, 39. Charles Wesley has well conveyed this joyous status: 
No condemnation now I dread; 
  Jesus, and all in Him, is mine! 
Alive in Him, my living Head, 
  And clothed in righteousness divine, 
Bold I approach the eternal throne, 
  And claim the crown, through Christ, my own. 
It is true that “no condemnation” is a negative declaration of “justification;” 
but  it  needs  to  be  asked  why  Paul  uses  this  expression  since  the  preceding 
broad context appears to provide a ready answer, including 5:16, 18 where 
kat£krina,  katakrina,  is  used,  as  well  as  7:1-25  where  the  tenor  of  the 
struggle  is  bound  up  with  legal  condemnation.  Man’s  fundamental  problem 
is that he qualifies for condemnation, chiefly at the hand of God, even as Job 
rightly  understood  (Job  15:14-16).  The  law  only  aggravates  this  truth;  it 
presses it home remorselessly; it increases the misery; it helps not one whit in 
providing  a  sanctifying  remedy.  But  to  those  “in  Christ,”  to  those  who  are 
justified,  who  are  clothed  with  a  perfect  and  acceptable  righteousness, 
condemnation is obliterated; God will not hear it in His court! His verdict is 
final,  total,  and  binding  for  eternity  (Ps.  34:22)!  Surely  this  causes  the 
prisoner in the dock to jump for joy and sing as Philip Bliss has taught us: 
My sin, O the bliss of this glorious thought! 
   My sin, not in part but the whole, 
Is nailed to the cross and I bear it no more; 
   Praise the Lord, praise the Lord, O my soul! 
 
 
                                              
8
  Leon Morris, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 300.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  228
(2)  There is freedom from the law of sin and death, v. 2. 
 
  Clearly  following  on  from  v.  1,  Paul  describes  the  liberated  status  of  “me” 
(NKJV, NIV) rather than “you” (NASB, ESV),
9
 which the context of 7:21-25 
would support. Here is the reason why the condemnation of the law does not 
fall  upon  those  in  a  saving  union  with  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  true  that  much 
perfectionist/holiness  ministry  has  stressed  that  here  a  higher  level  of 
sanctification  is  reached  through  the  now  dominant  Holy  Spirit.  However, 
while  a  blessed  change  is  evident  here  in  comparison  with  7:13-25,  it  is  the 
result of the free grace of the Spirit communicated and liberating gospel that 
is  now  uncompromised  and  unrestricted  by  legal  interference  (Gal.  3:1-3; 
5:25).  
 
(a)  The instrument of liberation, the law of the Holy Spirit.  
 
The  “[new  gospel]  law  of  the  Spirit”  is  intended  to  contrast  with  the 
“[old Mosaic] law of sin and death” described at the end of this verse, 
which  comparison  will  be  heightened  in  v.  3.  Indeed  “the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus”  is  given  expanded  definition  in  v.  3b-4. 
This is the superceding “law of the gospel of Spirit communicated grace, 
embodied in Jesus Christ” (II Cor. 3:7-18). In other words, Paul is now 
focusing on the importance of regeneration as it relates to justification.
10
 
These  doctrines  are  distinct  yet  vitally  related,  both  with  regard  to 
conversion  and  sanctification,  the  latter  mentioned  being  considered  at 
this  juncture.  This  emphasis,  while  having  been  more  implicitly 
broached  in  5:5;  6:4,  11;  7:6,  is  now  pressed  home  with  explicit  force 
through to v. 27. 
  Thus  it  is  “the  law  of  the  gospel”  that  regulates  the  Christian’s 
sanctification, and especially as that gospel is an internal reality through 
the  Holy  Spirit,  not  merely  some  external  testimony.  Beyond  the 
objectivity of the gospel in terms of historic reality, inscripturation, and 
true confession, there must be a soul, formerly of stone, made flesh that 
throbs  with  life  and  holy  affections.
11
  Thus  the  gospel  here  takes  on 
fuller  dimensions  than  those  perceived  when  we  first  believed.  Jesus 
Christ is the root and ground of the gospel, yet here there are explained 
the facts of life and union with this Savior. To savingly believe is to be 
made  alive  unto  Christ  and  engrafted  into  Him.  Such  a  relationship  is 
the  real  ground  of  Christian  fruitfulness  (7:4;  John  6:63;  15:4-5;  Gal. 
5:16-26)  and  not  the  administration  of  Moses.  Thus,  in  a  sermon  on 
Romans 8:2, Thomas Manton declares:  
                                              
9
  To  decide  here  on  which  pronoun  is  correct  is  difficult.  The  UBS  Greek  text,  second  edition,  opts for  “me” 
with a low “C” rating. Then in the third edition it changes to “you” with a lower “D” rating! 
10
  Many commentators differ as to whether the “law of the Spirit” here refers to the gospel or the Holy Spirit. 
However,  it  appears  that  for  Paul  these  entities  are  not  unrelated  (Tit.  3:5-7).  Refer  to  Morris,  Romans,  p. 
301. 
11
 “The thought [here] moves in the realm of internal operation and not in that of objective accomplishment. We 
must not assume, however, that the basis upon which it derives its power is far from the apostle’s thought.” 
John Murray, The Epistle to the Romans, I, p. 277.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  229
  [T]he  new  covenant  is  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.  .  .  . 
[T]he new covenant giveth liberty (to all that are really under it) from the 
slavery  of  sin,  and  the  condemning  power  of  the  law.  .  .  .  The  gospel, 
which  is  both  our  rule  and  charter,  is  the  law  which  in  Christ’s  name  is 
given  to  the  world.  .  .  .  It  is  his  [Christ’s]  law  that  is  written  upon  our 
hearts by the Spirit.
12
 
 
(b)  The emancipation, the past act of justification and regeneration. 
 
  “Has  set  me  free,”  is  correct  with  its  perfect  tense  connotation, 
according  to  Paul’s  intent,  though  “set  me  free”  most  accurately 
translates  the  aorist  of  ™leuqerÒw,  eleutheroo¯ .  In  other  words,  Paul 
refers to the decisive act of justification when the Holy Spirit was given 
at  that  same  point  of  conversion  and  thus  presently  indwells,  the  past 
event,  that  obtained  emancipation  in  terms  of  right  standing  and 
newness of life, which continues to have sanctifying effect (Gal. 5:1).   
 
(c)  The instrument of captivity, the law of sin and death. 
 
  What  is  this  enslavement  by  means  of  “the  law  of  sin  and  death”? 
Surely 7:23-25, but especially v. 24, presents the obvious answer. In the 
context  of  sanctification,  this  “law”  is  the  law  of  Moses
13
  which 
stimulates “sin and death” and the cry of agony, “Wretched man that I 
am!”  Here  is  the  Christian  whose  dalliance  with  Moses  is  productive, 
not  of  hoped  for  holy  improvement,  but  a  revelation  of  misery 
producing unholiness and condemnation. 
 
(3)  There is fulfillment of the righteousness of the law, v. 3-4. 
 
 The  contrasting  “laws”  of  v.  2  are  now  described  in  more  practical  and 
dynamic  terms.  The  inability  of  the  law,  according  to  its  misuse  and  wrong 
expectations, is eclipsed by the ability of the Spirit of the gospel.  
 
(a)  Christ is stronger than the law, v. 3. 
 
  Here God the Son is the obedient administrator of the Father’s plan of 
redemption,  while  in  vs.  2,  4,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  both  the 
communicator of the Redeemer’s work and the enabler of the redeemed.  
 
1)  The law’s impotence through the flesh. 
 
 “For  what  the  [Mosaic]  law  [of  God]  could  not  do”  supports  the 
contention  that  in  chapter  7  there  was  a  false  assumption 
concerning  the  purpose  of  the  law  and  its  ability.  Further,  the 
obvious  reference  here  to  the  Mosaic  code  supports  the  same 
identification of “the law of sin and death” in v. 2. This law is an 
excellent  ethic  without  dynamic.  Morris  quotes  T.  W.  Manson: 
                                              
12
  Thomas Manton, Works, XI, pp. 397, 399, 408. Cf. Barrett, Romans, p. 155. 
13
  So Barrett, Haldane, Hodge, Lloyd-Jones, Moo, Stott. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  230
“Moses’ law has right but not might; Sin’s law has might but not 
right;  the  law  of  the  Spirit  has  both  right  and  might.”
14
  But  why 
does  Paul  not  say,  “For  what  the  flesh  could  not  do,  weak  as  it 
was,  in  the  face  of  the  law  .  .  .”,  which  statement  is  in  fact  true? 
Because  the  law  has  been  misunderstood  as  an  instrument  of 
sanctification  and  it  must  be  exposed  in  all  of  its  sanctifying 
impotence. Thus the law is ¢dÚnatoj, adunatos, “without power.” 
In  this  regard  it  is  vital  to  again  appreciate  that  the  context  here 
concerns sanctification and not justification. 
  Luther’s initial comment on this verse is a follows: “Where now is 
free will? Where are those people who are trying to affirm that we 
of  our  own  natural  powers  can  produce  the  act  of  loving  God 
above all things?”
15
 Of course Paul has already argued concerning 
man’s moral impotence through corruption (3:9-18) so that here it 
is couched in terms of “[sinful] flesh” being “weak” and “lacking 
strength  [ability  to  acceptably  obey  the  law],”  that  is  apart  from 
the  renewing  and  enabling  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Man’s 
ultimate  problem  is  not  simply  the  fact  of  sin  but  rather  its 
congenital  root  that  produces  incapacitating  paralysis.  How 
pathetic  then  is  man,  as  the  paralytic,  when  he  claims  ability  that 
he manifestly does not have. 
 
2)  God’s potency through His Son.  
 
 “God  did,”  is  in  fact  saying  “God  the  Father  had  power  to  do 
what neither the law nor sinful flesh could accomplish.” These two 
words sum up the Christian gospel which is principally about God, 
that is who He is and what He has done. Here the evangel is again 
encapsulated  for  the  sake  of  grasping  more  fully  its  sanctifying 
effect.  
 
a)  His sending of His Son. 
 
  It  is  “His  own  Son,”  the  Son  of  His  heart  (John  1:1-2),  the 
Son rich in heavenly glory (II Cor. 8:9), the Son in whom He 
delights  (Prov.  8:30),  His  “only  one  (darling,  KJV)”  (Ps. 
22:20),  directed  in  the  counsels  of  eternity  (Ps.  2:7-8;  Heb. 
10:5-7)  to  leave  His  Father’s  bosom  (John  1:18;  17:5);  this 
was  divine  forfeiture  that  is  astonishing  when  the  intent  to 
save sinners is kept in mind.  
 
b)  His identification with sinful flesh. 
 
  This  was  condescension,  beyond  christophany  in  the  Old 
Testament, when the Son of God took on humanity and was 
“made  in  the  likeness  of  men”  (Phil.  2:5-8).  Here  this  Son, 
                                              
14
  Morris, Romans, p. 301. 
15
  Martin Luther, Works, XXV, p. 344. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  231
“not  unsympathetic  regarding  our  infirmities”  (Heb.  4:15), 
was  sent  in  the  “likeness/resemblance”  of  literally,  according 
to Stott, “[the] flesh of sin,” but not “in sinful flesh.”
16
  
  True  humanity  was  revealed  in  Adam  before  the  Fall,  hence 
Christ  being  perfected  in  humanity  (Heb.  5:8;  Luke  2:51-52) 
did not necessitate a yielding to the temptations of Satan, as if 
sympathy for thieves could only come from thieves., or only a 
thief  could  judge  a  thief.  Rather  Jesus  Christ  was  “of  David 
according to the flesh” (1:3) or descended from “the fathers . 
.  .  according  to the  flesh”  (9:5). In  the same way  he mingled 
with publicans and sinners without the slightest participation 
in their sinful lifestyles. Thus he closely identified with sinful 
and leprous human flesh in the colony of this world while in 
no way knowing the contagion. 
  
c)  His sacrifice for sin. 
 
  Jesus  Christ  not  only  confronted  the  diseased  of  this  world, 
but also the disease itself in the sense of himself being offered 
as  the  only  effective  antidote.  The  language  here  may  well 
convey the more specific idiomatic Hebrew thought of Christ 
being  offered  as  a  “sin  offering”  NIV.
17
  This  truth  naturally 
leads to the next thought of sin being vanquished. 
 
d)  His subduing of sin allied to the flesh 
 
  This  is  the  point  that  Paul  wishes  us  to  dwell  upon,  namely 
that by means of his atoning sacrifice, Jesus Christ “decisively 
judged/condemned/passed sentence upon [aorist of katakr…nw 
katakrino¯ ]  sin  in  its  unholy  alliance  with  the  flesh,”  cf.  7:8, 
11, 13. However, the ongoing context concerning “walking in 
accord  with  the  Spirit,”  v.  4,  surely  demands  more  than  an 
objective  and  judicial  meaning,  for  the  fact  of  such  a 
conquering  judgment  also  requires  a  conquering  ability.  So 
Toplady  describes  the  necessity  of  sin  being  not  only 
sentenced, but subdued. 
Be of sin the double cure, 
Cleanse me from its guilt and power. 
Thus  Murray  explains  at  length  that  “the  forensic  term 
‘condemn’ can be used in this instance to express the judicial 
judgment  executed  upon  the  power  of  sin  in  the  flesh  of 
Christ,”  so  that  sin  is  both  “sentenced,”  and  its  power 
“overthrown,  vanquished,”  (John  12:31;  I  Cor.  11:32;  Col. 
2:15; II Pet. 2:6).
18
   
                                              
16
  John Stott, The Message of Romans, p. 219.  
17
  Moo, Romans, p. 480; Morris, Romans, 303. 
18
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 279, with support from Alford.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  232
(b)  The Spirit is stronger than the flesh, v. 4. 
 
  The  resultant,  dynamic,  effectual  saving  work  of  Christ  is  now 
explained. Thus, “Christ wrought judgement against the power of sin in 
the flesh so that the righteous requirement of the law of Moses might be 
fulfilled for us and in us, that is the Christian whose pilgrim life is now 
directed by the indwelling Holy Spirit rather than carnal overtures.”  
 
1)  The fulfillment of the law. 
 
  The  expression  “the  righteous  requirement  of  the  law  [of 
Moses],”
19
 refers to God’s demand for righteousness that ought to 
be expressed in the believer’s lifestyle, his manifest life of practical 
righteousness.  Of  course  the  vital  matter  here  concerns  how  these 
demands  are  met  and  this  life  is  inaugurated  and  maintained. 
Further,  is  the  result  that  of  the  Christian  now  inwardly  suffused 
with  a  specific  commitment  to  the  keeping  of  the  Ten 
Commandments  or  the  law  written  on  the  heart?  In  other  words, 
what  exactly  is  this  expression  or  fulfillment  of  righteousness  to 
be? 
  Moo first points to the singular form of “righteousness,” cf. 2:26, 
in contrast with the more common plural usage in the Septuagint, 
which  strongly  suggests  a  more  essential  principle,  such  as  love 
being  the  fulfillment  of  the  law,  13:8-10;  Gal.  5:14.  Then  he 
emphasizes  the  passive  aspect  of  “fulfilled,”  namely  what  is 
fulfilled  for  us  rather  than  by  us.
20
  Morris  makes  a  similar  point 
“Notice  that  Paul  does  not  say,  ‘we  fulfill  the  law’s  righteous 
requirement’,  but  that  ‘the  righteous  requirement  of  the  law  is 
fulfilled in us’, surely pointing to the work of the Holy Spirit in the 
believer.”
21
  Hence  the  believer’s  personal  performance  is  not  so 
much the initial emphasis here as Christ’s performance. It is Christ 
who  has  done  the  fulfilling  for  us,  even  as  v.  3  describes  his 
“condemnation  of  sin  in  the  flesh.”  This  being  so,  Christ  has 
fulfilled  all  righteousness  “for  us”  and  “in  us,”  that  is  Christ  has 
perfectly  satisfied  the  law’s  essential  demands  for  those  in  saving 
union  with  him  through  the  Spirit.  So  Moo  translates,  “that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
according  to  the  flesh  but  according  to  the  Spirit.”
22
  Christ  has 
settled all accounts with the law through our union with him, 7:1-
4; now the superceding New Covenant “law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ  Jesus,”  v.  2,  has  been  established  (John  13:34)  and  the 
believer now walks under this new administration of the Spirit. 
                                              
19
 Literally, “the righteousness of the law,” except that we have dika…wma, dikaio¯ ma, here focusing on expressed 
righteousness,  1:32;  2:26;  5:16,  18,  rather  than  dikaiosÚnh,    dikaiosune¯,  meaning  the  standard  of  what  is 
right, 3:5, 25-6. 
20
  Moo, Romans, pp. 481-3. 
21
  Morris, Romans, p. 304. 
22
  Moo, Romans, pp. 470, 484-5. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  233
2)  The regeneration of the Spirit. 
 
 We  might  have  thought  concerning  the  preceding  emphases  of 
Romans that Paul assumes the act of regeneration to be implicit in 
the  act  of  justification.  The  new  birth  is  not  dealt  with  so 
categorically as justification in the early chapters, yet at this point 
the  doctrine  of  Christian  vitality,  at  a  personal  and  experiential 
level,  takes  on  a  primacy  that  sharply  transfers  us  from  the 
objective  truth  of  being  right  with  God  to  the  subjective  truth  of 
being  alive  unto  God. Of  course  both  truths, while  being  distinct, 
yet  are  also  indivisibly  related.  Thus,  “if  anyone  [claiming  to  be 
justified by grace through faith] does not have the Spirit of Christ 
[the Spirit of God], he does not belong to Him [God],” v. 9. 
 Life  is  a  pilgrimage,  and  the  Christian  walks  a  narrow  way 
directed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  contrast  with  the  broad  way  where 
pilgrims  are  directed  by  the  flesh  (Matt.  7:13-14).  For  Paul  the 
flesh is the source of dynamic carnality, with its seductive lustings; 
this  is  because  the  body  is  captive  to  sin  (7:5,  18,  25;  8:3;  Gal. 
5:17);
23
  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  source  of  dynamic  spirituality,  with 
its energizing unto righteousness. Thus the Christian is “walking” 
(present tense) according to the Spirit.  
  Here  the  negative  and  positive  aspects  of  holiness  are  plainly 
described,  and  this  contrast  between  flesh  and  Spirit  will  be 
enlarged  upon  through  to  v.  17.  The  marks  of  such  spiritual 
journeying  will  focus  on  the  arena  of  the  mind  which  embraces 
either life or death, peace or hostility, adoption or slavery. 
 
b.  Thinking in the Spirit of Christ, vs. 5-8. 
 
Up to this point, “sin in the flesh” has been acknowledged as not only the driving 
force  behind  the  walk  of  the  natural  man,  but  also  the  irritating  force  of  the 
Christian  dominated  by  the  impotent  law.  Now  we  are  taken  to  a  deeper  level 
where  the  power  of  the  renewed/regenerate  mind  is  acknowledged  as  having 
potency  over  “sin  in  the  flesh.”  As  in  Romans  generally  (7:23,  25;  12:2,  16),  so 
here  Paul  upholds  the  vital  role  of  the  mind  in  the  life  of  the  Christian.  Four 
references  in  four  verses  to  the  “mind”  describe  the  activity  of  thinking,  of 
rational interaction with knowledge, especially in the New Testament, with regard 
to revealed moral truth.
24
 Such “thinking” is to be both a ground of sanctification 
                                              
23
 Moo  defines  “flesh”  here  as,  “not  the  flesh  of  our  bodies,  or  the  bodies  themselves,  but  the  ‘this-worldly’ 
orientation that all people share.” Romans, p. 478. But such disassociation from the actual body, which Paul 
has considered since 6:6, is too vague and extreme. In 6:6 he referred to “our body of sin” and in 8:3 it is “sin 
in  the  flesh.”  Thus  “flesh”  as  distinct  from  the  “Spirit”  is  our  sinfully  polluted,  influential  humanity;  in  the 
unbeliever it has an agreeable alliance with the “old man in Adam,” while in the believer it has a disagreeable 
alliance with the “new man in Christ.” This latter relationship is especially evident in 7:18, 24 where a clear 
distinction is made between “me” and “my [sinful] flesh.” 
24
 The root of fronšw, phroneo¯  / frÒnhma, phrone¯ma, is fr»n, phre¯n, meaning “diaphragm,” since this part of 
the body was regarded, in early times, to be “the seat of intellectual and spiritual activity,” Kittel, Friedrich, 
eds., Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, IX, p. 220. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  234
as  here,  as  well  as  unity  amongst  believers  who  are  exhorted  to  “be  of  the  same 
mind”  (15:5;  II  Cor.  13:11;  Phil.  2:2;  4:2).  This  emphasis  does  not  sit  well  with 
the  modern  Christian  who  is  more  inclined  to  be  directed  by  sensuality  and 
sentiment. But for Paul, gospel truth rightly apprehended in the mind, through the 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  foundational  for  a  resultant  spiritual  walk.  Hence, 
“practical  Christian  living”  has  its  genesis  in  the  mind  (I  Pet.  1:13-15),  even  as 
does carnal behavior (Eph. 4:17; Col. 1:21).  
 
(1)  Spiritual thinking repudiates the flesh, v. 5. 
 
  It is the carnal/natural mind of the unbeliever that prompts him to vigorously 
trade  at  “Vanity  Fair”  which  is  under  the  patronage  of  “Beelzebub, 
Apollyon,  and  Legion,  .  .  .  [also  their  friends]  Lord  Old  Man,  the  Lord 
Carnal Delight, the Lord Luxurious, the Lord Desire of Vain Glory, my old 
Lord  Lechery,  Sir  Having  Greedy.”
25
  It  is  the  spiritual/heavenly  mind  of  the 
believer  that  prompts  him,  in  traversing  Vanity  Fair,  to  respond  to  the 
innumerable solicitations, “‘Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity [Ps. 
119:37]’and  look  upwards,  signifying  that  [his]  trade  and  traffic  [are]  in 
heaven; . . . . [declaring] ‘We buy the truth [Prov. 23:23].’”
26
 Here is the root 
of  Christian  sanctification.  Moo  significantly  points  out  that  Paul  Ais  not 
warning Christians about two possibilities they face [since] . . . ‘being in the 
flesh’ (vs. 7-8) is not a possibility for the believer. . . . Paul is contrasting two 
groups  of  people:  the  converted  and  the  unconverted.”
27
  Thus  the  carnal 
Christian/spiritual  Christian  dichotomy  of  recent  days  is  clearly  repudiated 
here. 
 
(2)  Spiritual thinking results in life and peace, v. 6. 
 
  Mental  contemplation  has  consequences  so  that  knowledge  digested, 
depending  upon  its  quality,  effects  destiny,  in  much  the  same  way  that  the 
food  we  eat  effects  our  health  and  longevity.  Hence  a  carnal  or  spiritual 
mentality  produces  inevitable  results,  even  as  specific  sowing  produces  a 
predictable  harvest  (Gal.  6:7-8).  Again,  here  are  not  options  but 
consequences.  The  carnal  person,  with  a  mind-set,  a  bent  toward  carnality, 
surely is “death” (6:23), that is presently exists as dead to God in the mind 
(Eph. 2:1-3). He sees but is blind; he hears but is deaf; he lives but is dead; he 
is  exposed  to  the  truth  but  has  no  appetite  or  thirst  for  it;  his  body  has  a 
pulse, but his soul is cold as a stone. 
  But on the other hand, the regenerate mind that presently focuses on spiritual 
truth is alive unto God, 5:17-18; 6:4, 8, 11, 22-23; 8:2, not hostile, 8:7, is at 
peace with God, 5:1; 8:1; 15:17, not subject to His condemnation and wrath, 
3:16-17. Here then is the fulness of true conversion. Lloyd-Jones significantly 
comments:  
                                              
25
  John Bunyan, Works, III, pp. 127, 130. 
26
  Ibid., p. 128. 
27
  Moo, Romans, p. 486. Also Lloyd-Jones, Romans 8:5-17, p. 11. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  235
  In many ways this [life from Christ and life in Christ] is the major theme of the 
New Testament; everything, including justification, leads up to it, and centers 
in  it.  The  doctrine  of  regeneration  is  absolutely  foundational.  It  is  because  so 
many  do  not  realize  this  that  they  have  a  wrong  view  of  evangelism,  and 
become interested overmuch in decisions, and they believe that people can fall 
away  after  they  have  become  Christians.  It  is  all  because  of  a  failure  to 
understand the idea of regeneration and of life, that we really are born again as 
the result of the operation of the Spirit, and are made ‘partakers of the divine 
nature [II Pet. 1:4].’
28
 
 
(3)  Carnal thinking results in hostility toward God, vs. 7-8. 
 
 Why is the mind that is set on the flesh described as “death” (v. 6)? Because 
that mind is militantly opposed to God and thus proves its “deadness.” Thus 
men reveal their deadness with regard to God by their attitude toward God.  
 
(a)  Carnal thinking is averse to God, v. 7. 
 
  By  “the  mind  set  on  the  flesh”  is  meant  the  soul’s  chief  focus,  its 
primary interest through mental activity, contemplation and consequent 
affection  concerning  this  world’s  varied  menu.  Thus  such  a  person 
proves  to  be  a  militant  opponent  and  enemy  of  God.  Here  is  no 
neutrality,  no  slight  acknowledgment  or  token  appreciation  of  God 
(Col. 1:21; I John 2:15); the natural man is not even tinged with regard 
for  the  Divine.  Rather  he  wars  against  God  and  His  holy  demands  in 
particular (Ps. 2:1-3). Like Judas, he may well fraternize with the friends 
of God and mingle close to the courts of God, yet he would nevertheless 
crucify God for thirty pieces of silver!  
  Further  proof  of  this  defiance  is  the  carnal  mind’s  lawlessness,  its 
opposition to “the law of God” in contrast with the Christian’s “inner 
man”  (7:22).  In  other  words,  the  carnal  mind,  faced  with  the 
unavoidable  demands  of  God’s  moral  universe,  His  essential 
righteousness  which  is  intrinsic  to  the  Decalogue,  the  Pentateuch,  the 
Old  Testament,  the  two  great  precepts  (Matt.  22:37-39),  and  human 
conscience,  chafes  at  the  bit  or  bucks,  so  to  speak,  at  God’s  moral 
imperatives. 
  But  why  is  this  mental  attitude  against  the  righteousness  of  God  so 
intractable,  so  invariable,  so  thoroughly  pervasive  in  this  world?  It  is 
because  the  carnal  mind  “is  not  able,”  oÙd •  g¦r  dÚnatai,  oude  gar 
dunatai, it does not have the innate power and ability to reverse its bias 
so  as  to  love  that  holy  will  of  God  which  it  formerly  regarded  with 
contempt.  In  other  words,  the  natural  man  does  not  have  the  capacity 
for self-renovation in his soul, that is with regard to a reversal of moral 
affections, any more than a pig can reverse his love of the pig-pen or a 
dog can reverse his taste for his own vomit (II Pet. 2:22). Here is no free 
will,  no  seed  of  goodness  in  human  nature,  no  universal  prevenient 
grace, for thorough depravity produces total moral inability. Herein lies 
                                              
28
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:5-17, p. 34. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  236
the  necessity  of  a  gospel  of  sovereign,  effectual  saving  power  since  a 
gospel  merely  on  offer  has  not  the  slightest  prospect  of  being  fruitful. 
Jesus  Christ  does  not  merely  call  men  out  of  the  human  pig-pen,  but 
rather  enters  that  realm  of  corrupt  human  debris  for  the  purpose  of 
actually,  individually  delivering  them,  their  nature,  intellect,  will  and 
affections, from their hopeless, leprous captivity. 
 
(b)  Carnal thinking displeases God, v. 8. 
 
  Logically, because the carnal man is incapable of obeying the righteous 
demands of  God,  it  follows  that  he  is  also  incapable,  “is  not  able,”  oÙ 
dÚnantai,  ou  dunantai,  of  pleasing  the  righteous  God.  But  further, 
consider  that  the  essence  of  his  carnality  is,  as  Luther  describes  it, 
“[T]his  crookedness,  this  depravity,  this  iniquity”  whereby  “man  turns 
in  upon  himself”  and  thus  “seeks  his  highest  good.”
29
  So  that  those 
“who  are  in  the  flesh,”  view  themselves  as  being  at  the  center  of  the 
universe;  they  pamper  themselves,  their  physical,  sensual,  intellectual 
and  Adamic  beings,  and  at  best  allow  God  a  peripheral  role.  Thus  if 
man shunts God to one side, it is impossible for that same God to have 
pleasure  in  the  one  who  attempts  to  dethrone  Him.  This  is  especially 
true  concerning  religious  and  social  liberalism,  for  any  token 
acknowledgment  of  a  revisionist  and  man-shaped  god  is  overwhelmed 
by  vaunted  and  humanitarian  concerns  which  are  but  sophisticated 
carnality that stimulates no heavenly pleasure. 
 
c.  Living in the Spirit of Christ, vs. 9-11. 
 
 Contrariwise, the only people who please God are those who are “in the Spirit,” 
as  these  verses  now  explain.  To  them,  God  is  the  center  of  the  whole  universe, 
indeed they belong to God, are alive to God, and identify with His righteousness. 
This  contrast  marks  out  the  radical  distinction  between  a  true  believer  and  an 
unbeliever.  
 
(1)  The Spirit of God indwells, v. 9. 
 
  Now  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  takes  on  a  significance  that  ranks equally 
with  the  doctrine  of  justification  that  so  dominated  the  earlier  part  of 
Romans.  Likewise  in  the  life  and  ministry  of  a  Christian,  both  doctrines 
should  be  regarded  as  being  of  equal  importance.
30
  Here  we  come  to 
                                              
29
  Martin Luther, Works, 25, p. 351. 
30
 In the early part of his ministry, Lloyd-Jones, like George Whitefield, gave greater emphasis to preaching on 
the  need  of  regeneration  while  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  and  justification  by  faith  were  more 
“assumptions.” However it was a Calvinistic Methodist minister who made the Welsh preacher aware of this 
lack. D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, The First Years 1899-1939, pp. 190-2. In the case of Whitefield, apparently it 
was John Wesley who helped his fellow field preacher in a similar way. Today we have likewise witnessed the 
“born  again”  movement,  although  many  preachers  err  in  the  opposite  direction  by  emphasizing  a  sterile 
justification  at  the  expense  of  regeneration.  Biblically  speaking,  the  true  Christian  must  be  both  alive  unto 
God  and  right  with  God.  J.  C.  Ryle  adds:  “You  need  not  only  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  the 
quickening,  sanctifying  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  make  you  a  true  Christian,  and  deliver  you  from  hell.” 
Old Paths, p. 275.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  237
understand that regeneration is very much integral to the gospel (Tit. 3:5-7), 
and should be regarded as coterminous with justification and conversion. We 
expand  in  translation,  “However,  you  are  not  now  living  according  to  the 
dominion of the flesh but rather that of the indwelling Spirit of God, that is 
if  (and  it  is  assumed  to  be  the  case)  this  same  Holy  Spirit  is  presently 
dwelling in you believers who congregate in Rome.” 
 
(a)  Positively, the Spirit inhabited Christian lives “in the Spirit.” 
 
  It  is  the  indwelling  “Spirit  of  God”  that  marks  out  a  believer  from  an 
unbeliever, not a carnal from a Spiritual believer, or a regular Christian 
from  a  Spirit  baptized  Christian.  For  Paul,  it  is  conversion  that  brings 
both  death  to  sin  in  justification  and  renewal  of  the  heart  in 
regeneration, through “the Spirit and the water and the blood” (I John 
5:7-8). Thus John Stott writes, “To know Christ and to have the Spirit 
are  one.  Bishop  Handley  Moule  was  wise  to  write  that  ‘there  is  no 
separable Gospel of the Spirit’. Not for a moment are we to advance, as 
it were from the Lord Jesus Christ to a higher or deeper region, ruled by 
the  Holy  Ghost.”
31
  Here  is  the  distinguishing  dynamic  of  a  true 
Christian since the residency of this Spirit is eclectic (II Pet. 1:3-4), and 
it is this life of God that makes him distinguishable in his contrast with 
the common carnality of this world. 
 
(b)  Negatively, the person vacant of the Spirit of God is not owned of God. 
 
  Here  “the  Spirit  of  Christ”  must  be  synonymous  with  “the  Spirit  of 
God.”
32
  The  inference  is  akin  to  that  of  John’s  Gospel  where  the 
ministry of the Holy Spirit is, to “bring to your remembrance all that I 
[Christ]  said  to  you.  .  .  .  [That]  He  will  testify  about  Me.  .  .  .  He  will 
glorify Me” (John 14:26; 15:26; 16:14; cf. I John 3:24). Note the triune 
inference here in which Christ through the Spirit brings union with the 
Father. Categorically,  to  have the Spirit  of  God  is  to  have  the  Spirit  of 
Christ and thus a saving, living appreciation of this Son of God. To be 
void  of  this  Spirit  of  Christ  is  to  be  void  of  any  saving  union  with  the 
God of Abraham. 
 
(2)  The Spirit of Christ indwells, v. 10. 
 
 Expanded translation: “If (and it is assumed to be true that) Christ through 
the Spirit indwells you, then on the one hand the body is dead on account of 
sin, but on the other hand the S(s?)pirit is life on account of righteousness.” 
As  the  preceding  context  indicates,  literally  “Christ  in  you”  (cf.  Gal.  2:20; 
4:19; Eph. 3:17; Col. 3:11) does not equate Christ with the Spirit or declare 
that  the  second  person  of  the  Trinity  indwells  the  believer.  Rather  Jesus 
                                              
31
  Stott, Romans, p. 225; also Moo, Romans, p. 490. 
32
 Note that Paul does not use the title “Holy Spirit” in this eighth chapter. Here he is concerned about the Spirit 
sourced in the Father and the Son rather than the sacred character of the third person of the Trinity. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  238
Christ, seated at the right hand of the Father, is represented by the person of 
the Holy Spirit (I John 3:24). J. C. Ryle comments:  
 I do not say that the expression, ‘Christ in us’ is unscriptural. But I do say that 
I see great danger of giving an extravagant and unscriptural importance to the 
idea  contained  in  the  expression;  and  I  do  fear  that  many  use  it  now-a-days 
without exactly knowing what they mean, and unwittingly, perhaps, dishonor 
the mighty work of the Holy Ghost.
33
 
 That the body, sîma, so¯ ma, as distinct from flesh, s£rx, sarx, is dead means 
that the physical vehicle of the redeemed soul is intrinsically defiled, judged, 
and  decaying  on  account  of  sin,  6:6,  13.  As  such  it  is  unresponsive  to  God 
and on a course of dissolution; it is a corpse with only the motion of death 
throws!
34
 On the other hand, “the Spirit of Christ” is the life of God that has, 
through  grace,  invaded this  condemned  carcass because  of  the  gospel of  the 
righteousness  of  God,  that  which  is  both  imputed  and  imparted.
35
  Such  a 
conquest means that the “death throws” are under the dominion of the Holy 
Spirit. 
 
(3)  The Spirit of resurrection indwells, v. 11. 
 
  Here is glorious, irresistible logic that builds upon the reality of the Spirit of 
God indwelling the Christian. Thus, by expansion, “But if (and it is assumed 
to  be  true  that)  the  Spirit,  that  is  of  He  who  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead,  is 
dwelling  in  you,  then  that  same  One  who  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  will 
also  make  alive  your  mortal  bodies  through  His  Spirit  who  dwells  in  you.” 
Thus  the  matter  of  the  saving  of  the  body  is  taken  up  in  view  of  the  prior 
description in v. 10 of its seeming consignment to inevitable and just decay. 
Consequently  the  Spirit  that  instrumentally  saves  the  soul  will  also  save  the 
body  rather  than  replace  it.  Hence  this  “mortality”  will  be  clothed  with 
“immortality”  which  transformation  is  simply  the  culmination  of  gospel 
victory (I Cor. 15:53-57; II Cor. 5:4). Yet also note here that while the Spirit 
is  the  agent  of  indwelling  and  enabling,  even  so  the  Father  commands  this 
gospel work while the Son is its holy executor. 
  Again  Stott  quotes  Bishop  Handley  Moule:  “Wonderful,  is  this  deep 
characteristic of Scripture: its gospel for the body. In Christ, the body is seen 
to be something far different from a mere clog, or prison, or chrysalis, of the 
soul.  It  is  its  destined  implement,  may  we  not  say  its  mighty  wings  in 
prospect,  for  the  life  of  glory.”
36
  For  Paul,  the  term  “mortal  bodies,”  t¦ 
qnht¦  sèmata,  ta  thne¯ta  so¯ mata,  that  is  our  bodies  subject  to  corruption 
through  sin,  surely  has  in  mind  much  of  his  earlier  emphasis  introduced  in 
                                              
33
  J. C. Ryle, Holiness, pp. xiii-xiv. 
34
 “The body is, as it were, the seat of death; there is a principle of decay and of death in the bodies of all of us, 
and the process of decay is increasing and growing. Ever since the Fall, the moment we enter into this world 
and begin to live we begin to die. Your first breath is one of the last you will ever take!” Lloyd-Jones, Romans 
8:5-17, p. 69.  
35
 Both  Lloyd-Jones  and  Morris  understand  this  broader  meaning;  Haldane,  Moo,  Shedd,  Stott,  an  objective 
righteousness; Hodge, a subjective righteousness. 
36
  Stott, Romans, p. 227. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  239
6:6 regarding “our body of sin” that has continued to be a major concern up 
to  this  point.  Indeed  this  focus  is  ongoing,  except  that  it  now  concerns  the 
anticipation  of  triumph  when  we,  who  presently  “groan  within  ourselves,” 
finally  experience  “the  redemption  of  our  body,”  v.  23,  which  indeed  shall 
be  transformation  “into  conformity  with  the  body  of  His  [Christ’s]  glory” 
(Phil. 3:21).  
 
2.  There is life in the Spirit of adoption, vs. 12-17. 
 
  Thus  this  indwelling  Spirit  is  a  “mighty  Spirit”  in  terms  of  our  present  interim 
pilgrimage (Eph. 1:19; 3:7, 16, 20; Col. 10-11), and the expectations of holy Christian 
living  are  now  presumed  to  be  based  upon  this  fact,  especially  as  the  doctrine  of 
adoption  incorporates  such  truth.  In  practical  terms,  Thomas  Manton  comments: 
“Now the Spirit would not put us upon the labors of the body, and take no care for the 
happiness of the body; these two always go together: ‘The body is for the Lord, and the 
Lord for the body’ (I Cor. 6:13). Christ expecteth service from the body, and gave up 
himself for the redemption of it, as well as the soul (I Cor. 6:20).”
37
 
 
a.  The obligations of sonship, vs. 12-13. 
 
 Like  the  strong  inference  commencing  v.  1,  here  there  are  emphatic  and  weighty 
consequences  with  regard  to  the  Christian  so  potently  indwelt  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  As  the  well  equipped  soldier  is  responsible,  under  obligation  in  terms  of 
using those accouterments which are designed for his safety, so the child of God is 
indebted to the reign of the Spirit of God in his life with regard to an appreciation 
of  His  might,  holy  dominion  and  exclusive  claims.  The  word  Ñfeilšthj,   
opheilete¯ s,  describes  a  person  in  debt;  for  Paul  in  1:14  it  is  divine  obligation 
according  to  his  calling;  in  15:27  it  is  the  Gentiles’  material  obligation  to 
Jerusalem for their spiritual inheritance; in Gal. 5:3 it is the legalist’s obligation to 
keep the whole law. So here it is the weight of responsibility which the indwelling 
Holy  Spirit  brings,  as  a  Master  who  although  capable  of  being  “grieved”  (Eph. 
4:30)  and  “quenched”  (I  Thess.  5:19),  yet  here  upholds  His  rightful  demands 
upon the children He has adopted.  
 
(1)  Not to the flesh, vs. 12-13a. 
 
  Implicit is the understanding that while the flesh was formerly the governing 
lord  of  the  Christian  when  unconverted  (7:5;  8:3;  Eph.  2:3),  now  the 
indwelling lordship of the more potent Holy Spirit has supplanted this reign. 
Therefore  a  new  allegiance  is  incumbent  upon  the  child  of  God,  in  two 
realms.  First,  in  the  realm  of  Scripture  knowledge,  we  are  to  yield  to  the 
truth  lodged  in  the  mind  concerning  the  Spirit’s  dominion.  Second,  in  the 
realm of regenerate experience, we are to yield to the dynamic concerning the 
Spirit’s  indwelling  life  and  influence  .  Thus  the  Christian  is  not  merely  a 
person  who  has,  through  a  commitment  of  will,  spurned  carnal  overtures; 
rather he is under constraint of the life of God in his soul God, a new bias, a 
                                              
37
  Thomas Manton, The Complete Works of Thomas Manton, XII, p. 24. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  240
new  tilt  of  affections,  to  repudiate  the  lustings  of  the  flesh  by  means  of  the 
new resources bestowed at conversion. 
 But  does  the  warning  here  imply  the  possibility  of  defection?  The  “if” 
proposition  can  be  translated:  “For  if,  and  this  axiom  is  certainly  true,  you 
are living [present tense] according to the dictates of the flesh, then you are 
destined to a damnable death.” Lloyd-Jones responds that Paul uses, “a form 
of speech which we use when we say to a person, ‘If you put your finger into 
that  fire  you  will  be  burned.’”
38
  That  is,  here  we  have  a  warning  which  the 
true child of God will certainly heed. The present tense focus here, as well as 
that of the “deeds,” pr£xeij, praxeis, of the flesh in v. 13b, is reminiscent of 
I  John  3:8-9  where  a  similar  concern  describes  those  “practicing  sin”  as 
being  “of  the  devil.”  Yes  a  Christian  can  and  will  sin  according  to  the 
promptings  of  the  flesh  (I  John  v1:8,  10),  but  not  as  a  matter  of  habitual 
routine.  Rather  he  will  truly  repent,  seek  cleansing  and  forgiveness  (I  John 
1:9), and pursue a course of “mortification,” that is a “putting to death the 
deeds of the body.” 
 
(2)  But to the Spirit, v. 13b. 
 
  An  opposite  destiny  awaits  those  who  actively  pursue  mortification  of  the 
body through the Spirit, namely that of “life.” Surely this incorporates both 
a present perspective as vs. 14-17 describe, though primarily a future hope as 
vs. 18-25 anticipate.  
  “Mortification”  or  “putting  to  death”  is  ¢poqnÇskein,  apothne¯skein,  a 
present  active  infinitive  describing  a  continuous  process  that  the  believer 
initiates,  in  contrast  with  the  death  resulting  from  carnality  just  mentioned. 
Moo explains Paul’s point here as, “you will not ‘die’ if you cause your sin to 
die.”
39
 However it is vital to note here that such responsible activity is that of 
a regenerate child of God “by the Spirit,” that is the Spirit of God the Father 
“who raised Jesus from the dead.” This subject of mortification has been the 
object of much perverse teaching, especially by the Roman Catholic Church 
in  terms  of  physical  containment  and  even  flagellation.  On  the  other  hand, 
Puritans in particular have contributed greatly to our understanding of Paul’s 
teaching  here,  perhaps  preeminently  in  John  Owen’s  work,  Of  The 
Mortification  of  Sin  in  Believers,  Etc.  based  on  this  verse.
40
  In  summary  he 
declares: 
 
(a)  There is no “sin killing” unless a person be a true believer. “There is no 
death  of  sin  without  the  death  of  Christ.  .  .  .  All  attempts,  then,  for 
mortification of any lust, without an interest in Christ, are vain.”
41
 
 
 
                                              
38
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:5-17, p. 109. 
39
  Moo, Romans, p. 495n. 
40
 John  Owen,  The  Works  of  John  Owen,  VI,  pp.  5-86.  In  a  similar  vein,  also  refer  to  Owen’s  The  Nature, 
Power, Deceit, and Prevalency of the Remainders of Indwelling Sin in Believers, ibid., pp. 153-322. 
41
  Ibid., pp. 33, 35. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  241
(b)  There  must  be  “universal  sincerity”  or  a  thorough  concern  regarding 
sin.  “So,  then,  it  is  not  only  an  intense  opposition  to  this  or  that 
peculiar  lust,  but  a  universal  humble  frame  and  temper  of  heart,  with 
watchfulness over every evil and for the performance of every duty, that 
is accepted.”
42
  
 
(c)  There must be faith in the succor of Christ. “Set faith at work for the 
killing of thy sin. His blood is the great sovereign remedy for sin-sick 
souls.  Live  in  this  and  thou  wilt  die  a  conqueror;  yea,  thou  wilt, 
through the good providence of God, live to see thy lust dead at thy 
feet.”
43
 
 
(d)  Particular  directions  to  follow.  1.  Be  alert  to  symptoms  of  lust,  2.  Be 
aware  of  the  results  of  sin,  hardening,  loss  of  peace  and  strength, 
wounding,  loss  of  usefulness,  discipline.  3.  Allow  guilt  its  full 
dimensions.  4.  Cultivate  the  longing  for  deliverance.  5.  Consider  the 
nature of the body (I Cor. 9:27). A man may have leanness of body and 
soul  together.  6.  Watch  for  situations  that  cause  eruptions.  7.  Quickly 
oppose the first actings of sin. 8. Let the soul contemplate the excellence 
and majesty of God. 9. Seek peace only from God, not self delusion. 
 
Of course, such a disciplined Christian life is ever the fruit of justification, as 
the order here in Romans clearly indicates. However, the Christian saved by 
sovereign grace is to vigorously “consider [put to death]
44
 the members of his 
earthly  body  with  regard  to  immorality,  impurity,  passion,  evil  desire,  and 
greed”  (Col.  3:5).  Or,  he  is  to  “crucify  the  flesh  with  its  passions  and 
desires”  (Gal.  5:24).
45
  Notice  the  paradox  that  Paul  describes  as  resulting 
from our investment in either the flesh or the Spirit. Living in the flesh brings 
death; inflicting death on the flesh brings life (S. of S. 2:15; Matt. 5:29-30). 
So  Morris  well  describes  these  fundamental  options  that  confront  us  in  this 
modern era when he concludes: “There is a living that is death and there is a 
putting to death that is life.”
46
  
 
b.  The marks of sonship, vs. 14-17. 
 
 As  Paul  has  recently  given  sudden  focus  to  an  aspect  of  sanctifying  truth  that 
receives concentrated emphasis, namely that of the role of the “mind” in vs. 5-8, 
so  here  the  doctrine  of  “adoption”  is  given  the  same  abrupt  prominence.  The 
reason  for  this  injection  of  teaching  concerning  the  believer’s  sonship  with  the 
Father  through  Christ  appears  to  be  further  explanation  about  the  Spirit’s 
effective  operation  in  sanctification,  but  especially  “mortification.”  In  other 
words,  the  dominant  leading  of  the  Spirit,  v.  14,  is  that  by  which  mortification 
                                              
42
  Ibid., p. 42. 
43
  Ibid., p. 79. 
44
 Here  Paul  uses  “to  put  to  death,”  nekrÒw,  nekrow¯ ,  probably  emphasizing  the  condition  of  death  whereas 
¢poqnÇskein, apothne¯skein refers to the act that brings death about. 
45
  Here Paul uses “crucify,” staurÒw, stauroo¯ , emphasizing the strictness and severity of the mortification.  
46
  Morris, Romans, p. 312. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  242
becomes a possibility, reality, and evidence of adoption; but further, this is in fact 
the  “Spirit  of  adoption,”  v.  15,  by  which  an  array  of  reassuring  inheritance 
privileges have been obtained, vs. 16-17. 
 The  concept  of  “adoption”  is  described  by  the  terms  of  “sonship,”  v.  14,  “son 
placement,” v. 15, and “children,” vs. 16-17. In vs. 14-15 the root term concerns 
uƒÒj,  huios,  while  in  vs.  16-17  it  is  tšknon  teknon,  the  distinction  perhaps  being 
the “relation of nature” in the former and the “position of honor” in the latter.
47
  
 
(1)  Living sonship from the Spirit of the Father, v. 14. 
 
  Since v. 13 was very much concerned with lifestyle, whether according to the 
flesh or Spirit, here Paul further declares and qualifies who are really the sons 
of  God.  Confession  of  this  relationship  is  one  thing,  but  manifestly  “being 
led by the Spirit of God” is quite another. So, and the text is emphatic at this 
point,  only  those  “who  are  being  led  [present  tense,  passive  voice]  by  the 
Spirit of God” are authentic Christians. Thus, such teaching indicates that all 
men  are  not  universally,  in  terms  of  salvation  and  thus  distinct  from  Acts 
17:28, “children of God,” according to “the brotherhood of man under the 
fatherhood  of  God.”  The  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  charged  certain  Jews  with 
being  “children  of  the  devil”  (John  8:44)  is  sufficient  proof  of  this  point. 
Further, the “like father like son” principle applies here. As the natural child 
bears the physical likeness of his parentage, so the child of God inherits the 
spiritual likeness of his heavenly Father, and that of His Spirit in particular. 
Children  of  God  are  spiritual  by  inevitable  derivation  because  “God  is 
S[s?]pirit”  (John  4:24).  Now  when  such  a  child  of  God  becomes  aware  of 
such  a  relationship,  especially  its  internal  witness,  then  great  confidence 
results, as v. 15 indicates.  
  But more specifically, what is this “leading”? The word ¥gw, ago¯ , in its basic 
form simply means “to lead,” as in Luke 4:1 where Christ was “led around 
by [under the influence of] the Spirit in the wilderness.” But here the context, 
as  well  as  the  passive  force,  suggests  a  more  personal  constraint.  So  Lloyd-
Jones comments: “What [the Spirit] does is to persuade them. He leads us by 
persuasion;  not  by  brute  force,  not  against  our  will.  He  persuades  the  will, 
which is a very different thing. . . . What the Spirit does is to enlighten and 
persuade. . . . It is a matter of powerful persuasion.”
48
 
 
(2)  Adoptive access through the Spirit to the Father, v. 15. 
 
  Paul  continues  to  use  antithesis,  as  in  vs.  4-6,  9,  12-14  to  stress  the  radical 
character of a regenerate child of God, who, previously under the dominion 
of  the  flesh,  is  now  under  obligation,  that  is  inevitable  constraint  to  live 
confidently  according  to  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God,  v.  11.  Here  “flesh” 
seems  paralleled  with  “spirit  of  slavery”  and  “Spirit”  with  “spirit  of 
adoption,”  though  now  heightened  passion  is  injected  based  upon  a 
privileged filial relationship. 
                                              
47
  Frederic L. Godet, Commentary on Romans, p. 311. 
48
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:5-17, p. 167.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  243
(a)  The spirit of slavery leads to fear. 
 
  The  term  “spirit  of  slavery”  refers  to  a  former  “inward  principle”  or 
“guiding  mind  set”  which,  according  to  the  preceding  context, 
especially  7:14,  23,  would  be  a  legal  dominion  that  has  captivated  the 
unwary  Christian  (Gal.  2:4;  4:1-7;  5:1-2;  Col.  2:16-23;  I  Tim.  4:1-5; 
Heb.  12:18-24).
49
  Lloyd-Jones  best  captures  the  thrust  here  when  he 
writes of those believers who are subject to this bondage:  
  I  am  thinking  of  people  who  are  quite  clear  about  their  relationship  to 
the  law  the  —Ten  Commandments,  or  the  moral  law  —as  a  way  of 
salvation.  They  have  seen  clearly  that  Christ  has  delivered  them  from 
that; . . . they are quite clear about their justification. However, they now 
begin to look positively at the Christian life, and in a very subtle way —
quite unconsciously to themselves —they turn it into a new kind of law, 
with the result that they get into a spirit of bondage and of serfdom. . . . 
In other words, holiness becomes a great task to them, and they begin to 
plan and organize their lives and introduce certain disciplines in order to 
enable  them  to  carry  it  out.  .  .  .  We  can  easily  impose  upon  ourselves  a 
new law.
50
 
  Sometimes a child lives in a “spirit of slavery” before its parents; it lives 
in the household, in submissive, trembling fear, addressing the father as 
“Sir,”  in  military  style,  but  not  as  one  who  confidently  cries  “Abba! 
Father!”  and  runs  toward  his  gracious  embrace.  So  here  Paul  is 
concerned  that  the  slavish  Christian  is  robbed  of  the  joy  of  his  secure 
standing  through  sovereign  grace,  his  ready  welcome,  his  privileged 
inheritance;  he  lacks  confidence;  he  has  doubts  concerning  his 
acceptance and approval before God. Now he distinguishes true sonship 
as being based, not upon conformity to principle, but vital constraint of 
the Spirit of adoption. 
 
(b)  The Spirit of adoption leads to access. 
 
  As  is  Paul’s  frequent  method  (6:11;Col.  3:3-5),  so  here  he  reminds  the 
Christian  of  his  real  status;  it  is  as  if  he  were  to  say:  “Child  of  God! 
Wake  up  to  your  high  calling!  Being  an  authentic  Christian,  you  have 
received  the  Spirit  of  adoption  who  mediates  sonship.  Therefore  be 
bold,  even  as  you  sense  the  constraint!  Confidently  address  Him  as, 
‘Abba!  Father!’”  The  key  term  here  is  pneàma  uƒoqes…aj,  pneuma 
huiothesias.  We  opt  for  the  Holy  “Spirit”  here  based  upon  Galatians 
4:6, who communicates and seals the new adoptive relationship, which 
is literally, “son placement.” Bruce explains:  
  The  term  ‘adoption’  may  smack  something  what  of  artificiality  in  our 
ears;  but  in  the  first  century  AD  an  adopted  son  was  a  son  deliberately 
chosen  by  his  adoptive  father  to  perpetuate  his  name  and  inherit  his 
estate;  he  was  no  whit  inferior  in  status  to  a  son  born  in  the  ordinary 
                                              
49
  Surely this slavery is not a reference to the unconverted state as Hodge and Murray maintain, which, as we 
have earlier considered, is not the concern of Romans 7.  
50
  Lloyd-Jones, Spiritual Depression, Its Causes And Cure, pp. 165-6. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  244
course  of  nature,  and  might  well  enjoy  the  father’s  affection  more  fully 
and reproduce the father’s character more worthily.
51
 
  So  the  Christian  “is  crying  out,”  present  tense  of  kr£zw,  krazo¯ ,  being 
onomatopoeic,  sounding  like  its  meaning,  as  the  call  of  a  raven  (Gal. 
4:6; cf. Rom. 9:27; John 7:28, 37; 12:44). The actual cry is “Abba! The 
Father.”
52
 “Abba” is also onomatopoeic, an Aramaic term expressing a 
child’s  parental  affection,  though  forbidden  to  be  used  by  household 
slaves.  Its  use  in  Mark  14:36  by  Christ  indicates  fervent,  intimate 
relationship  rather  than  distress.  Thus  the  believer  responds  with 
intimate,  confident,  albeit  respectful,  fondness  for  God  who  he  knows 
with  a  depth  of  experience.  But  is  this  a  normative  description  here? 
Lloyd-Jones  does  not  believe  so.  We  respectfully  disagree  since,  while 
not  denying  a  gradual  heightening  of  assurance  following  conversion, 
the  context  here  does  not  support  a  higher  level  of  assurance,  akin  to 
Lloyd-Jones’ understanding of a post-conversion baptism of the Spirit.
53
 
Such  a  view  must  describe  the  “sons  of  God”  in  v.  14  as  a  distinct 
group  of  believers,  whereas  the  context  of  vs.  9-13  distinguishes 
between the spiritual believer and the carnal unbeliever.
54
 Furthermore, 
a natural child is not always crying out “Abba, father,” though it does 
so  periodically.  So  the  Christian  has  not  only  intervening  valleys  of 
diminished  confidence  but  also  periodic  seasons  of  heightened 
assurance, of course initially at conversion. “t those times he delights to 
sing Charles Wesley’s verse: 
                                              
51
  F. F. Bruce, Romans, p. 166. 
52
  Israel was to regard Jehovah as “Father” (Deut. 32:6; Isa. 63:16), in contrast with Mohammedanism. 
53
  At this point in Lloyd-Jones’ commentary, he deals at length with the view that Romans 8:14-17, in parallel 
with  Romans  5:5  and  Ephesians  1:13-14,  describes  the  assured,  Spirit  baptized  Christian.  However  not  all 
believers  have  this  depth  of  experience  or  Spirit  baptism.  He  writes,  “that  the  ‘Spirit  of  adoption’  is  not 
essential  to  salvation,  for  a  person  can  be  a  Christian  and  yet  know  little  or  nothing  about  this  Spirit  of 
adoption. As I say this I am well aware that the majority of the Protestant Reformers would not have agreed 
with  my  statement,  for  they  tended  to  teach  B  Luther  and  Calvin  in  particular,  but  others  also  B  that 
assurance  of salvation  was  necessary  to salvation.  They  failed  to  draw a distinction  between  salvation  itself 
and  the  assurance  of  salvation.  So  they  tended  to  teach  that  a  man  was  not  saved  unless  he  knew  he  was 
saved,  that  is  to  say,  unless  he  had  assurance.”  Romans,  8:5-17,  p.  246.  On  Romans  5:5  he  writes:  “You 
cannot  be  a  Christian  without  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  you  can  be  a  Christian  without  having  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  your  heart.”  Romans  5,  p.  84.  He  musters  numerous  testimonies  in  support,  including 
Thomas  Brooks,  Philip  Doddridge,  Jonathan  Edwards,  Charles  Finney,  John  Flavel,  Thomas  Goodwin, 
Howell Harris, D. L. Moody, John Owen, Edward Payson, J. Philpot, Charles Simeon, C. H. Spurgeon, John 
Wesley, and George Whitefield. 
54
  More  contemporary  commentators  who  would  not  agree  with  Lloyd-Jones  at  this  point  include  Boice, 
Haldane,  Hendriksen,  Hodge,  Moo,  Morris,  Murray,  Shedd.  Stott  comments,  “I  have  no  wish  whatever  to 
call  in  question  the  authenticity  of  the  experiences  described  [by  Lloyd-Jones].  Nor  do  I  doubt  that  many 
Christian  people  continue  to  be  granted  similar  profound  encounters  with  God  today.  Nor  is  there  any 
problem in affirming that the ministry of the Spirit of adoption (v. 15) and the inner witness of the Spirit (v. 
16) are designed to bring us assurance. My anxiety is whether the biblical texts have been rightly interpreted. 
I  have  the  uneasy  feeling  that  it  is  the  experiences  which  have  determined  the  exposition.  For  the  natural 
reading of Romans 8:14-17 is surely that all believers are ‘led by the Spirit’ (v. 14), have ‘received a Spirit of 
adoption’ (v. 15), and cry ‘Abba, Father’ as the Spirit bears witness to them that they are God’s children (v. 
16) and therefore also his heirs (v. 17). There is no indication in these four verses that a special, distinctive or 
overwhelming  experience  is  in  mind,  which  needs  to  be  sought  by  all  although  it  is  given  only  to  some.” 
Romans, p. 236.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  245
My God is reconciled, 
   His pardoning voice I hear; 
He owns me for His child, 
   I can no longer fear; 
With confidence I now draw nigh, 
   And Father, Abba, Father! Cry.    
 
(3)  Internal witness by the Spirit from the Father, v. 16. 
 
  Here is the quintessential verse concerning the highest category of Christian 
assurance.  A  believer  may  be  assured  from  reading  the  Bible  that  he  is  an 
adopted child of God, yet if that Bible is taken from him, what then? But if 
that same believer be in prison, none can take from him that witness of the 
Holy Spirit engraved upon his soul that speaks in biblical terms of adoptive 
blessings.  John  Wesley  warns  us:  “How  many  vain  men,  not  understanding 
what  they  spake,  neither  whereof  they  affirmed,  have  wrested  this  scripture 
to  the  great  loss,  if  not  the  destruction,  of  their  souls!  How  many  have 
mistaken the voice of their own imagination for this witness of the Spirit of 
God,  and  thence  idly  presumed  they  were  the  children  of  God,  while  they 
were  doing the  works  of  the devil! .  .  .  [I]t  is the  more necessary  to  explain 
and defend this truth, because there is a danger on the right hand and on the 
left.  If  we  deny  it,  there  is  a  danger  lest  our  religion  degenerate  into  mere 
formality;  lest  having  ‘a  form  of  godliness,’  we  neglect,  if  not  ‘deny,  the 
power  of  it.’  If  we  allow  it,  but  do  not  understand  what  we  allow,  we  are 
liable to run into all the wildness of enthusiasm.”
55
 
  The  context  concerns  “being  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God”  in  v.  14  and  the 
exuberant cry of “Abba! Father!” in v. 15. The initiative rests with the Holy 
Spirit,  for  it  is  “He  himself”  who  “testifies  with  out  spirit  that  we  are  the 
children of God.” The word summarturšw, summartureo¯ , cf. 9:1, means “to 
witness with.” Whereas in the context of justification 5:5 declares “the love 
of  [from]  God  has  been  poured  out  within  out  hearts  through  the  Holy 
Spirit,”  here  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  portrayed  as  a  constant  presence. 
Moo  comments  that  Paul  explains,  “how  it  is  that  ‘receiving  the  Spirit  of 
adoption’  enables  us  to  cry  out  ‘Abba,  Father!’  The  Holy  Spirit  is  not  only 
instrumental  in  making  us  God’s  children;  he  also  makes  us  aware  that  we 
are  God’s  children.”
56
  Here  is  the  impetus  that  constrains  the  exclamatory, 
familial cry of being owned of God, as Charles Wesley expresses: 
My God I am thine; what a comfort divine, 
   What a blessing to know that my Jesus is mine! 
In the heavenly Lamb thrice happy I am, 
   And my heart it doth dance at the sound of His name. 
  Hence Paul defines a fundamental, normative attitude of the Christian which 
marks  out  true  conversion.  Lloyd-Jones  teaching  at  this  point,  though 
unintentional, suggests a lesser standard that is rectified by a baptism of the 
                                              
55
  John Wesley, Fifty-Three Sermons, pp. 123, 136-7. Refer also to B. B. Warfield’s dealing with this problem in 
Faith And Life, pp. 187-9. 
56
  Moo, Romans, p. 503. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  246
Spirit.  Rather,  we  agree  here  with  Calvin  who  comments:  “Therefore,  this 
sentence standeth sure, that none can be called the son of God who doth not 
acknowledge  himself  to  be  such  [an]  one  (I  John  5:19).”
57
  This  is  not  to 
suggest that initial conversion has assurance in full bloom; but it is to affirm 
that there must be some budding of confidence that declares, “one thing I do 
know [is] that though I was blind, now I see” (John 9:25). 
 
(4)  Glorious inheritance with Christ from the Father, v. 17. 
 
  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  does  not  stop  at  reassuring  the  Christian  of  his 
adoption; there is so much more that is to be appreciated as a consequence of 
being  a  child  of  God,  and  this  involves  future  inheritance  and  glorification 
preceded by inevitable suffering, all of which is associated with Christ. 
 
(a)  The child of God has an inheritance with Christ. 
 
  Probably  drawing  on  the  Old  Testament  concept  of  “inheritance”  that 
commenced  with  Abraham,  4:4,  and  focused  on  “the  land”  under 
future Messianic reign (Ps. 25:13; 37:9;Is. 60:21), the child of God now 
has  a  more  glorious  prospect.  Having  received  the  Holy  Spirit  only  as 
“a  pledge  of  our  inheritance,  with  a  view  to  the  redemption  of  God’s 
own  possession”  (Eph.  1:14),  as  an  heir  the  Christian  is  to  confidently 
anticipate  the  fulness,  or  “the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in 
the saints” (Eph. 1:18). Thus the believer, as an “heir of God” (cf. Gal. 
4:7), is the future recipient of all of the “riches of His grace” (Eph. 1:7; 
2:7).  But  further,  the  language  here  suggests  that  we,  together  with 
Christ, inherit God himself. Haldane comments: “God is the portion of 
His  people;  .  .  .  God  is  all-sufficient;  and  this  is  an  all-sufficient 
inheritance;  It  is  God  Himself,  then,  who  is  the  inheritance  of  His 
children. . . . ‘Whom have I in heaven but Thee? And there is none upon 
earth that I desire besides Thee!’ (Ps. 73:24).”
58
 
 
(b)  The child of God has present suffering with Christ. 
 
  With  the  assurance  and  hope  that  adoption  stimulates,  the  believer  is 
able  to  traverse  the  inevitable  sufferings  that  he  experiences,  for Christ 
and like Christ. As Christ anticipated his inheritance of the Father and 
endured  earthly  trial  for  this  cause  (John  17:1,  4-5),  so  his  disciples 
tread  the  same  path.  They  persevere  because  of  an  inheritance 
perspective (Heb. 12:1-2). 
 
(c)  The child of God has the hope of glory with Christ. 
 
  Travail culminates in triumph so that co-glorification, like unto Christ’s 
glorious  body  (Phil  3:21),  becomes  the  moment  of  inheritance.  Peter 
describes  “the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glories  to  follow”  (I  Pet. 
                                              
57
  John Calvin, Commentary on Romans, p. 214. 
58
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 373. Also refer to Murray in support, Romans, I, pp. 298-9. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  247
1:11)” which the child of God is to likewise anticipate. So Paul in v. 18 
declares,  “that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  with  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  to  us.”  This  is  the 
appointed pathway for the church of Jesus Christ. 
Mid toil and tribulation and tumult of her war, 
   She waits the consummation of peace for evermore; 
Till with the vision glorious Her longing eyes are blest, 
   And the great Church victorious shall be the Church at rest.  
 
 
B.  FUTURE GLORY THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF GOSPEL GRACE, VS. 18-25.  
 
  There is an obvious connection with v. 19b that is at the same time transitional concerning 
the  whole  of  vs.  1-19a.  The  present  reign  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  believer,  the  present 
dominion  of  the  godly  mind  over  sin,  the  present  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  the  present 
adoptive relationship with the Father, the present internal witness of the Spirit, these are all 
experienced in an environment of present suffering and persecution. Nevertheless the best is 
yet to come when we shall “be glorified with Him [Christ].”So Paul launches forth from this 
point with the assurance that, for the Christian, future prospects are incomparably glorious.  
 For  the  child  of  God,  like  Job,  his  future  blessings  will  far  transcend  present  trials  (Job 
42:10-17).  In  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress,  John  Bunyan  portrays  the  authentic  pilgrim  as 
frequently  anticipating  the  transcendent  glory  of  the  Celestial  City.  When  the  prospect  of 
persecution tempts Christian to retreat, it is his assessment and vision of his final destination 
that encourages him to press forward. So here Paul presents a vision of “the freedom of the 
glory of the children of God, . . . the redemption of our body,” vs. 21, 23, that is intended 
to cause spiritual salivation.  
 
2.  There is hope of incomparable glory, v. 18. 
 
  The  “consideration”  or  “reckoning,”  log…zomai,  logizomai,  here,  cf.  2:3;  3:28;  6:11; 
14:14; II Cor. 10:11; 11:5; Phil. 4:8, is the focused activity of the Spirit animated mind 
of vs. 5-8. First, as with any normal Christian, it is sensitive to “the sufferings of this 
present  [now]  time.”  While  our  self-inflicted  troubles  are  excluded,  and  persecution 
may  be  a  subsidiary  concern,  yet  the  primary  cause  of  anxiety  here  is  the  inherent 
corruption  of  the  human  condition,  as  7:18,  23-24;  8:20-23  indicate.  These  struggles 
include  sickness,  the  aging  process,  poverty,  bereavement,  etc.  Now  the  believer  with 
poor or short-sighted focus will be a spiritual hypochondriac, much like Little Faith in 
The Pilgrim’s Progress, who was more complaining than forward looking pilgrims. But 
the  child  of  God  whose  clear  vision  is  set  heavenward  will  be  transported  to  a  more 
blessed  plain  of  existence  that  finds  the  impact  of  earthly  trials  to  be  greatly 
diminished. 
  For  Paul,  it  is  “the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  in  [e„j  not  prÒj]  us,”  that  is  glory 
imparted  to  thee  believer  and  not  merely  beheld  by  him.  This  “glory”  or  dÒxa,  doxa, 
especially  its  Hebrew  equivalent,  dobK* , kabod,  includes  the  idea  of  weight  of  honor 
that  a  king  would  display.  So  in  II  Corinthians  4:16-17,  “we  do  not  loose  heart,  but 
though our outer man is decaying, yet our inner man is being renewed day by day. For 
[our]  momentary,  light  affliction  is  producing  for  us  an  eternal  weight  of  glory  far 
beyond all comparison.” So here Paul describes this “glory” as “incomparable” insofar 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  248
as  earthly  glory  is  concerned.  But  more  specifically,  what  is  this  “glory”  yet  to  be 
received? Surely it is the fact that, “we shall be like Him, because we will see Him just 
as He is” (I John 3:3).  
  Two  days  before  Dr.  Martyn  Lloyd-Jones  passed  away,  having  refused  further  life-
sustaining medication, he wrote a note to his wife and family members: “Do not pray 
for  healing.  Do  not  hold  me  back  from  the  glory.”
59
  David  Brainerd  responded 
similarly on his deathbed: “I am almost in eternity. I long o be there. My work is done: 
I have done with all my friends: all the world is nothing to me. I long to be in heaven, 
praising  and  glorifying  God  with  the  holy  angels.  “All  my  desire  is  to  glorify  God.”
60
 
This is what Paul writes of here, and it is intended to make us be more reassured in our 
faith  as  we  look  beyond  ourselves  to  the  anticipated  privileges  and  delights  of  the 
Celestial City. 
 
3.  There is hope of creation redemption, vs. 19-22. 
 
  The  following  extension  of  thought  now  encompasses  “the  creation,”  or  “whole 
creation,” v. 22, which term seems to contrast with “we ourselves” in v. 23, so that the 
“subhuman  creation”  is  envisaged.”
61
  In  other  words,  a  polluted  universe  will  be  the 
object of God’s saving power. The effects of the Fall will be fully reversed so that the 
original creation will be redeemed as a whole so as to vindicate God.
62
 
 
a.  The creation yearns for redemption, v. 19. 
 
 An  expanded  translation  reads:  “For  the  intense,  absorbing,  neck-stretching 
expectation  [¢pokaradok…a,  apokaradokia]  of  the  subhuman  creation  is  eagerly 
awaiting  the  apocalyptic  revelation  of  the  sons  of  God.”  This  “unveiling  of  the 
sons  of  God”  looks  to  that  future  time  of  fulfilled  glory  when  those  presently 
saved  are  then  consummately  saved.  Such  redemptive  perfection  (I  Thess.  5:23), 
when “this perishable will have put on the imperishable, and this mortal will have 
put on immortality” (I Cor. 15:54), when “there will no longer be any mourning, 
or crying, or pain; . . . [when] there will no longer be any curse” (Rev. 21:4; 22:3), 
is fervently awaited by a creation under human dominion (Gen. 1:27-28). 
 Since  v.  18  has  spoken  of  “the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  in  us,”  so  here  that 
future glory is assumed when “the revealing of the sons of God” is described, as 
does I John 3:2: “We know that when He appears, we will be like Him, because 
                                              
59
  Iain Murray, D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, The Fight Of Faith, 1939-1981, II, p. 747. 
60
  Jonathan Edwards, The Works of Jonathan Edwards, II, p. 384. 
61
  Moo, Romans, pp. 513-5, also Cranfield, Hendriksen, Lloyd-Jones, Stott. Haldane adds that, “the prophets 
introduce  the  earth  as  groaning,  and  the  animals  as  crying  to  God,  in  sympathy  with  the  condition  of  man 
(Joel 1:10-20; Jer. 12:4; Isa. 13:13; 24:4-7; 33:9; 34:9; . . . . On the other hand, the Prophet Isaiah (49:13; ) 
predicates] . . . a better state of things. [So also] in Psalm 98:4-8,” Romans, pp. 378-9. 
62
  Such  redemption  of  the  material  universe  or  “the  whole  creation”  is  basic  to  a  premillennial  eschatology. 
Erich Sauer comments: “God does not abandon His plan for His creation, and even as in the beginning there 
was  an  earthly  condition  before  sin  broke  in,  so  will  there  be  finally  a  renewed  and  transfigured  earthly 
creation, a perfected condition of the earth after sin has  been overcome; and the last will surpass the first.” 
From  Eternity  To  Eternity,  p.  19.  Refer  also  to  Carl  Hock’s  defense  of  “new  heavens  and  a  new  earth”  (II 
Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:1) as renovation rather than re-creation, All Things New, pp. 197-200, also George Peters, 
The Theocratic Kingdom, II, pp. 479-93.  
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  249
we  will  see  Him  just  as  He  is.”  The  strong  inference  here  is  that  the  creation  is 
longing  for  that  time  when  it  can  applaud,  “clap  its  hands”  (Ps.  98:7-9;  Isa. 
55:12-13), at that time when the sons of God “will be revealed with Him [Christ] 
in glory” (Col. 3:4).
63
 Thus Lloyd-Jones makes application:  
 We  have  already  considered  Paradise  lost.  But  Paradise  is  to  be  regained.  This  is  a 
part of the great salvation, and the whole creation is involved. . . . But this is literally 
what is going to be true of all of us who are the children of God. Can we ever again 
allow  anything  to  get  us  down  in  this  world?  Will  you  ever grumble  and  complain 
again?  Will  it  worry  you  very  much  what  man  may  do  to  you?  You  are  being 
prepared for this indescribable glory which is awaiting the children of God. It is to 
be  manifested  and  revealed.  Lift  up  your  heads,  life  up  your  hearts,  by  faith  keep 
your eye on the coming glory. ‘Set your affection on things above, not on things on 
the  earth’  [Col.  3:2].  All  here  is  passing  and  temporary;  but  we  belong  to  the 
kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,  the  kingdom  which  God  has  prepared  for  His 
people, His children, ‘before the foundation of the world’ [Eph.1:4].
64
 
 
b.  The creation has need of redemption, vs. 20-21. 
 
  For  Paul,  the  material  creation  is  not  a  carnal  diversion  that  should  yield  to  a 
more  lofty  spiritual  mode  of  comprehension.  His  understanding  of  the  Old 
Testament  hope  must  incorporate  the  anticipation  of  a  renovated  world,  a  true, 
righteous  theocratic  utopia  that  triumphs,  through  the  agency  of  Christ,  over  a 
past fallen era.  
 
(1)  Due to bondage to assigned failure, v. 20. 
 
  Why  is  the  material,  sub-human  creation  in  this  state  of  pining  for  full 
human  redemption?  Because  it  also  has  suffered  degeneration  since  “it  was 
subjected  to  futility,”  that  is  God  consigned  it  to  “vanity”  or 
“purposelessness,” mataiÒthj, mataiote¯s, as frequently used in the Septuagint 
version  of  Ecclesiastes,  to  dissolution  and  decay  and  death,  when  He 
declared, “Cursed is the ground because of you [“dam]; in toil you will eat of 
it  all  the  days  of  your  life”  (Gen.  3:17).  Haldane  adds:  “For  as  the  leprosy 
not  only  defiled  the  man  who  was  infected  with  it,  but  also  the  house  he 
inhabited, in the same way, sin, which is the spiritual leprosy of man, has not 
only defiled our bodies and our souls, but, by the just judgment of God, has 
infected all creation.”
65
 Therefore the creation in its agony (Is. 24:4-7; 34:4) 
longs  for  similar  redemption;  it  does  not  have  thoughts  of  evolutionary 
improvement, of progress from randomness to ordered complexity. 
 
(2)  Due to bondage to inevitable freedom, v. 21. 
 
  Yet  this  appointment  to  corruption  by  God  purposed  not  only  degradation 
but also deliverance, so that the “hope” KJV at the end of v. 20 anticipates 
                                              
63
  Shedd comments: “Material nature is metaphorically in sympathy with redeemed man, and shall be restored 
with him. . . . Such personification of material nature is common in Scripture. Cf. Deut. 32:1; Job 12:7-9; Ps. 
19:1-6; 96:11-12; 148:3-10; Isa. 1:2; 14:8; 56:12.” Romans, p. 252. 
64
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:17-39, pp. 76, 81. 
65
  Haldane, Romans, p. 380. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  250
the  emancipation  described  in  v.  21,  that  is  the  “regeneration,” 
paliggenes…a,  palingenesia,  or  earthly  rebirth  of  Matthew  19:28.  Thus  the 
creation,  the  material  universe  including  the  flora  and  fauna,  will  know 
emancipation  from  its  former  “slavery  to  corruption,”  a  world  of  entropy 
and dissolution that is “red in tooth and claw.” Just as the children of God 
will  experience  glorious  renovation,  so  the  world  at  large  will  undergo 
similar conversion. Charnock comments: 
  As the world, for the sin of man, lost its first dignity, and was cursed after the 
fall,  and  the  beauty  bestowed  upon  it  by  creation  defaced,  so  it  shall  recover 
that  ancient  glory,  when  he  shall  be  fully  restored  by  the  resurrection  to  that 
dignity he lost by his first sin. As man shall be freed from his corruptibility, to 
receive  that  glory  which  is  prepared  for  him,  so  shall  the  creatures  be  freed 
from  that  imperfection  or  corruptibility,  those  stains  and  spots  upon  the  face 
of  them,  to  receive  a  new  glory  suited  to  their  nature,  and  answerable  to  the 
design of God, when the glorious liberty of the saints shall be accomplished. . . 
.  The  earth  hath  both  thorns  and  thistles  and  venomous  beasts,  the  air  hath 
had its tempests and infectious qualities, the water hath caused its floods and 
deluges.  .  .  .  It  is  convenient  that  some  time  should  be  allotted  for  the 
creature’s attaining its true end, and that it may partake of the peace of man, 
as  it  hath  done  of  the  fruits  of  his  sin;  otherwise  it  would  seem  that  sin  had 
prevailed  more  than  grace,  and  would  have  had  more  power  to  deface,  than 
grace to restore things into their due order.
66
 
 
c.  The creation groans for redemption, v. 22. 
 
  “For  we  know”  suggests  a  specific  Christian  appreciation  and  sympathy 
concerning  the  present  state  of  the  universe,  “the  whole  creation”  exclusive  of 
believers,  due  not  merely  to  dissolution,  but  innate  disturbance.  The  “groaning” 
here,  represented  by  the  compound,  susten£zw,  sustenazo¯ ,  literally  “to  groan 
together,”
67
  suggests  intertwining  fellowship  in  distress,  whether  by  means  of 
flood, earthquake, fire, and hurricane, or famine, pestilence, plague, and chaos, or 
rust, corrosion, decay, and resultant dust, or war, rape, pillage, and all manner of 
evil. Yet this anguish is not to be comprehended in terms of futility as the world is 
prone  to  do;  rather  the  child  of  God  has  an  opposite  perspective,  that  of  “birth 
pangs” that will usher in glorious deliverance ( Isa. 24:1-23; Matt. 24:6-8, 29-31), 
which principle v. 18 introduced. 
 
4.  There is hope of human redemption, vs. 23-25. 
 
  Reverting to the thought of v. 18, Paul now associates “birth pangs” with the believer 
who,  like  the  expectant  mother,  hopefully  anticipates  or  “waits  eagerly”  for 
consummated adoption, that is “the redemption of our body.” More specifically, “the 
whole  creation”  is  the  womb  that  shall,  after  much  writhing,  eventually  usher  forth 
“the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God,”  v.  19.  Conception  has  taken  place;  troublesome 
gestation is in progress; but “the glory that is to be revealed to us,” v. 18, is yet future.   
 
                                              
66
  Stephen Charnock, Works, I, pp. 377-8. Peters also quotes Tyndale, Henry, Toplady, Wesley, Gill, Delitzsch 
who express similar opinions. Theocratic Kingdom, II, pp. 484-5. 
67
  For Cranfield it is an intensity and accord in groaning, Romans, I, pp. 416-7. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  251
a.  We groan for completed redemption, v. 23. 
 
  The tension which the Christian experiences between the indwelling Spirit and his 
mortal  flesh,  7:21-8:8,  his  present  earthly  endurance  and  future  glorious  hope, 
receives yet further clarification. 
 
(1)  The believer has present first fruits.. 
 
  The  believer  presently  has  “the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,”  an  initial  bestowal 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  both  anticipates  and  promises  the  full  harvest.  Note 
the  use  of  ¢park»,  aparche¯,  here  also  in  11:16;  16:5;  I  Cor.  15:20.  In  the 
same way God has provided a “down-payment” or “pledge” of the Spirit to 
begin with, an ¢rrabèn, arrabo¯ n, (II Cor. 1:22; 5:5; Eph. 1:14). 
 
(2)  The believer has present groaning. 
 
Like  creation  in  general,  though  contrary  to  expectation,  the  Christian 
groans  due  to  his  participation  in  God’s  curse  upon  a  fallen  race.  He  too 
experiences  inevitable,  inescapable  bodily  dissolution  (Eccles.  12:1-8)  Thus 
at  conversion,  the  believer  does  not  receive  all  of  his  inheritance,  that  is 
perfection  and  glory  in  every  regard,  though  he  constantly  longs  for  its 
reception.  Hence,  the  groaning  here  has  a  twofold  aspect.  First  there  is  the 
groaning that results from the conflict that the human condition presents (II 
Cor.  5:2,  4),  and  was  distinctively  described  in  7:14-25.
68
  So  Stott 
comments:  
[I]t  is  not  only  our  fragile  body  (so¯ ma)  which  makes  us  groan;  it  is  also  our 
fallen nature (sarx), which hinders use from behaving as we should, and would 
altogether  prevent  us  from  it,  were  it  not  for  the  indwelling  Spirit  (7:17,  20). 
We  long,  therefore,  for  our  sarx  to  be  destroyed  and  for  our  so¯ ma  to  be 
transformed. Our groans express both present pain and future longing.
69
  
Second there is the groaning that anticipates, that longs for “the redemption 
of God’s own possession” (Eph. 1:14).  
 
(3)  The believer has future adoption. 
 
  The  encompassing  term  here  is  the  yearned  for  “adoption  as  sons,”  the 
accomplishment  that  fulfills  original  appointment,  which  climactic  event 
includes  fully  realized  union  with  God,  total  glorification,  the  plenitude  of 
the Spirit, and reigning participation in new heavens and a new earth. Then 
                                              
68
  We  reject  as  too  categorical  Lloyd-Jones’  statement  that,  “the  groaning  of  Romans  8:23  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  ‘wretched  man’  of  Romans  7:24.  .  .  .  So  there  is  nothing  in  common  between  the  groaning  of 
Romans 8:23 and that of the wretched, miserable man of Romans 7:24. It is an entirely different matter. This 
groaning  is  the  result  of  certainty,  that  ‘wretchedness’  was  the  result  of  uncertainty  which  cries  out  ‘Who 
shall deliver me?’” Romans, 8:17-39, p. 92. It is true that the man of Romans 7 is aggravated by his dalliance 
with the  law,  yet  his  accentuated  problems are of  the  same  character  as  that groaning which Paul  presently 
describes. 
69
  Stott,  Romans,  p.  242.  In  basic  agreement  are  Calvin,  Haldane,  Moo,  Moule,  Shedd.  Surely  the  forward 
looking groan in hope is stimulated by the present groan in travail over conflict with the flesh. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  252
shall the Son of Man say, “Come, you who are blessed of My Father, inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world”  (Matt. 
25:34).  The  specific  future  focus  is  “the  redemption  of  our  body,”  that 
transformation  from  mortality  to  immortality,  from  the  perishable  to  the 
imperishable  (I  Cor.  15:51-53),  which  has  repeatedly  been  Paul’s  concern 
since  6:6.  The  Christian  does  not  simply  receive  a  new  body  that  displaces 
the old. Rather “redemption” indicates that God will reclaim that which was 
formerly abandoned; He will have holy triumph over that which was defiled 
(Phil.  3:21).  And  thus  such  a  prospect  becomes  the  ground  of  “waiting 
eagerly” for the best that is yet to come, of indomitable hope. 
 
b.  We hope for completed redemption, v. 24. 
 
  So “we are saved by hope” KJV, or better, “in hope we have been saved [aorist]” 
NASB.  Thus  “hope”  is  not  an  instrument  of  salvation,  but  rather  the  sphere  in 
which  salvation  first  came  to us.  Thus “hope”  is  a  fundamental  characteristic  of 
being a Christian from the point of conversion onward. Moo comments: “Always 
our salvation, while definitively secured for us at conversion, has had an element 
of  incompleteness,  in  which  the  forward  look  is  necessary.”
70
  Hence  the  present 
does  not  incorporate  that  consummation  of  our  salvation  just  described  as 
adoption/redemption, otherwise it would be realization rather than hope. Rather 
we  hope  for  that  which  is  revealed  and  promised  as  future,  and  yet  is  not 
presently observable.  
 
c.  We await completed redemption, v. 25. 
 
  However,  in  hoping  for  that  which  is  not  presently  observable  and  realized,  our 
understanding  of  the  substance  of  this  hope  causes  us  to  persevere  with  eager 
expectation. The child of God is like the engaged bride, looking hopefully at her 
engagement  ring.  She  perseveres  with  eager  expectation;  she  endures  the  days  of 
preparation; she is “saved in hope,” that is she lives the days of her engagement in 
the sphere of hope, longingly awaiting that which she only perceives through the 
eye of faith, namely the wedding celebration, the day of consummated union. So 
the  child  of  God  “eagerly  awaits”  his  consummated  union  with  Christ,  while  at 
the  same  time  contemplating  the  pledge/token  of  his  engagement  (Eph.  1:14). 
Such contemplation involves “being led by the Spirit, . . . walking by the Spirit, . . 
. sowing to the Spirit” (8:14; Gal. 5:16; 6:8). 
 
 
C.  INTERIM SECURITY THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF GOSPEL GRACE, VS. 26-39. 
 
 Whereas  in  vs.  1-17  we  considered  the  believer’s  present  liberty  that  the  dominion  of  the 
Holy Spirit has established, and in vs. 18-25 that same token Spirit encouraged us by means 
of  the  promised  future  glory  that  shall  have  dominion  over  this  groaning  human  and  sub-
human  creation,  now  we  revert  back  to  that  present  intimate  dominion  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
which is productive of triumphant assurance, vs. 26-39.  
 
                                              
70
  Moo, Romans, p. 522. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  253
1.  Through the help of the Spirit’s intercession, vs. 26-27. 
 
  In  the  midst  of  a  world  evidencing  violent  death  throws,  the  child  of  God  not  only 
exercises hope but also a prayerful disposition in that hope. Such an attitude is one of 
expressed  longing  while  personal  conflict  continues.  Thus  the  Christian  prays  “in  the 
Spirit,”  Jude  20,  yet  so  often  his  cry  to  heaven  seems  feeble,  and  thus,  as  Morris 
comments, we “become discouraged in our praying, for we are conscious that we do it 
so  badly.  But  here,  too,  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  devices.  The  Spirit  intercedes  for 
us.”
71
 
 
a.  The Spirit intercedes with intensity, v. 26. 
 
The  expression,  “In  the  same  way,”  æsaÚtoj,  ho¯ sauto¯ s,  connects  us  to  the 
parallel encouragement that “hope” engenders in v. 25, and the aspect of forward 
looking “groaning,” v. 23, that accompanies such anticipation.
72
 Thus, as we have 
“groaning  expectation  concerning  our  consummate  adoption,”  so  in  the  same 
manner we are further assisted by the “groaning of the Holy Spirit” in the realm 
of our poverty in prayer. 
 
(1)  Our weakness for which the Spirit of God intercedes 
 
The believer’s “weakness” or “lack of strength,” ¢sqšneia, astheneia, is that 
“we do not know how to pray as we should,” a specific manifestation of his 
overall  frailty  (cf.  II  Cor.  12:5,  9-10).  But  this  is  not  a  lack  with  regard  to 
desire  as  much  as  prudent  knowledge.  Dana  and  Mantey  more  accurately 
translate: “we know not what we should pray for as we should.”
73
 Warfield 
rightly  comments  on  Paul  here:  “It  is  not  lack  of  purpose—it  is  a  lack  of 
wisdom, that he intimates. We may have every desire to serve God and every 
willingness  to  serve  Him  at  our  immediate  expense,  but  do  we  know  what 
we need at each moment?”
74
 We often pray glibly, generally, remotely, even 
searchingly,  concerning  the  will  of  God,  yet  without  certainty.  Consider 
Paul’s prayer in II Corinthians 12:7-8. 
 
(2)  The Spirit of God’s intercession for our weakness. 
 
Even  as  Jesus  Christ  promised,  “I  will  not  leave  you  as  orphans”  (John 
14:18), so the Holy Spirit as “the Helper” (John 14:26) will similarly be the 
one who “helps our weakness” in prayer, and specifically in that “the Spirit 
Himself  intercedes  for  us  with  groanings  too  deep  for  words.  This  “help,” 
sunantilamb£nw,  sunantilambano¯ ,  literally  means  “to  assist  alongside  by 
bearing in the place of”(cf. Matt. 11:28-29). Murray adds:  
                                              
71 
Morris, Romans, p. 326
 
72  
Lloyd-Jones  associates  v.  26  here  with  vs.  16-17,  that  is  “the  Spirit  also  helps  our  weakness”  in  a  manner 
similar to that in which “the Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God.” Thus vs. 18-
25  present  a  digression.  Romans,  8:17-39,  p.  121.  However,  Paul’s  use  of  this  connecting  adverb  in  seven 
other instances is always with reference to the immediate preceding context. 
 
73  
Dana and Mantey, A Manual Grammar of the Greek New Testament, p. 146.
 
74 
  B. B. Warfield, Faith & Life, p. 198.
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  254
The children of God have two divine intercessors. Christ is their intercessor in 
the court of heaven (cf. vs. 34; Heb. 7:25; I John 2:1). The Holy Spirit is their 
intercessor in the theatre of their own hearts (cf. John 14:16-17). . . . The glory 
of Christ’s intercession should not be allowed to place the Spirit’s intercession 
in eclipse.
75
  
Hence,  the  Holy  Spirit  helps  the  believer  in  his  quest  to  pray  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit  “intercedes  for  us,”  or  “petitions  on 
our behalf” since His pleading is better able to direct our praying according 
to the will of God. Warfield adds that,  
it  is  not  an  intercession  through  us  as  mere  conduits,  unengaged  in  the 
intercession ourselves; it is an intercession made by the Spirit as our helper and 
not  as  our  substitute.”
76 
Further,  the  Spirit’s  support  is  “with  groanings  too 
deep  for  words,”  literally  “nonverbal,  incomprehensible,  profound  stirrings 
and  longings,”  even  as  the  whole  creation  and  the  believer  presently 
groans, vs. 22-23.
77
 
Thus  the  Christian,  in  his  weakness  in  prayer,  yet  will  have  promptings, 
“gracious  inclinations”  according  to  John  Owen,
78
  originating  from  the 
indwelling  person  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  will  give  him  both  constraint  and 
direction. It is as James Montgomery has written: 
 Prayer is the soul’s sincere desire, 
    Uttered or unexpressed, 
 The motion of a hidden fire 
    That trembles in the breast 
 Prayer is the burden of a sigh, 
    The falling of a tear, 
 The upward glancing of an eye 
    When none but God is near. 
So  when  the  impulse  to  pray  comes  with  regard  to  a  specific  situation  or 
person, he should not hesitate but rather immediately respond to this divine 
stimulation.  Consider  Peter  in  mortal  danger  in  Acts  12.  Yet  the  church  is 
praying for him in prison, vs. 1-5, and upon his supernatural deliverance, he 
finds the saints praying for him as he arrives at their gathering, vs. 11-12.  
 
b.  The Spirit intercedes with knowledge, v. 27. 
 
 Now we consider the divine perspective of God the Father with regard to what we 
have  just  understood  in  terms  of  human  deficiency  in  prayer.  An  expanded 
translation  reads:  “and  God  the  Father,  who  searches  the  hearts  of  all  men 
                                              
75  
Murray, Romans, I, pp. 311-2.
 
76  
Warfield, Faith & Life, p. 199.
 
77 
  Lloyd-Jones, as with Morris and Murray, identifies this groaning with that of the believer, such as when in v. 
15 and Galatians 4:6 he crys out, “Abba! Father!” Romans, 8:17-39, p. 136. However, this understanding is 
gramatically  improbable,  Cranfield,  Romans,  I,  p.  423;  Hendriksen,  Romans,  pp.  275-7.  Glossalalia  or 
speaking  in  tongues  is  excluded  here  since  it  was  verbally  understood  in  Acts  2:8,  or  otherwise  called  for 
verbal interpretation (I Cor. 14:13, 26-28). 
78  
John Owen, Works,
 
IV, p. 259-60; also refer to pp. 271-6. 
 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  255
universally, certainly knows with appreciation the mind and petitions of God the 
Holy  Spirit,  because  that  same  Spirit  intercedes  in  prayer,  according  to  God  the 
Father’s good will, on behalf of the saints in particular.” 
  The expression, “and He who searches the hearts,” recalls the universal truth of I 
Kings  8:39;  I  Chronicles  28:9;  Proverbs;  15:11;  Jeremiah  17:9-10;  Acts  1:24; 
Hebrews  4:13.  It  is  not  a  pretty  picture,  that  is  the  heart  interests  of  the  human 
race  in  general.  However,  He,  God  the  Father,  also  knows  the  purposes  of  God 
the Holy Spirit, and in particular His groaning concern and intercession for those 
who  He  savingly  indwells.  Therefore  the  Father  is  aware  of  the  Spirit’s  holy 
intentions  concerning  His  holy  will,  even  as  they  are  channeled  through  the  soul 
of  a  weak  yet  redeemed  sinner.  This  aspect  of  divine  omniscience  is  of  special 
delight to the Father, and consequently suggests that such Spirit directed praying 
will certainly be heeded, even if so much vain prayer in the world is spurned.  
 
2.  Through the assurance of certain glory, vs. 28-30. 
 
Here we confront a well known verse that is commonly understood in isolation, rather 
than  retrospectively  and  prospectively,  and  in  so  doing  a  wonderful  panorama  of 
gospel  truth  is  neglected.  The  overall  point  is  that  God,  in  delighting  in  the  Spirit’s 
intercessory  pleading  concerning  His  holy  will  for  the  groaning  Christian,  has  an 
expansive  and  glorious  agenda  for  that  same  believer  which  will  never  be  thwarted, 
weakness notwithstanding. Further, this course is safely guarded for the Christian, and 
such security is guaranteed by the Spirit’s sovereign participation. So Luther comments:  
On this text  depends the  entire passage which follows to  the end of the chapter. For He 
wills that to the elect who are loved by God and who love God the Spirit works all things 
for good, even things which in themselves are evil. He approaches , yes, from this point on 
begins to discuss the matter of predestination and election, which is not as deep a subject 
as is commonly thought, but rather is  a wonderfully sweet thing for those who have the 
Spirit, but a bitter thing and harsh above all things for the prudence of the flesh.
79
  
 
a.  A good end for the called, v. 28. 
 
  An  expanded  literal  translation  reads:  “And  we  know  that,  to  those  who  are 
loving  the  only  true  God,  all  things  are  working  together  toward  a  good, 
consummate and glorious end, that is to those who are the called ones according 
to  His  electing  purpose.”  We  could  also  say,  “To  those  who  are  the  called 
according to the predestined purpose of God and thus love Him, to such ones only 
all  the  particulars  of  life  are  presently  working  together  so  as  to  ultimately 
coalesce when God’s good and holy objective is obtained, that is glory.”  
  “We  know”  declares  an  expectation  concerning  firm  Christian  assurance  at  this 
point,  doubtless  because  it  is  the  indwelling  and  shepherding  Holy  Spirit  who 
witnesses  concerning  such  a  secure  relationship.  But  what  is  the  “good”  here? 
Surely  it  is  the  climactic  “glorification”  of  vs.  29-30,  or  “the  blessings  of  the 
coming  age,”
80
  to  which  terminus  the  Holy  Spirit  safely  and  certainly  transports. 
Thus Joseph could declare to his trembling brethren, “As for you, you meant evil 
                                              
79
  Luther, Works, 25, p. 371. 
80
  Moo, Romans, p. 529n. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  256
against me, but God meant it for good in order to bring about this present result, 
to  preserve  many  people  alive.”  The  particulars  of  Joseph’s  life  were  often 
troublesome, yet an overriding providence ordered that they coalesce at a point of 
ultimate salvation.  
  What  then  are  the  “all  things”  that  are  eventually  eclipsed  by  “the  good”?  Not 
simply the adversities of life in general that unendingly confront the Christian. But 
rather  the  conflicts  that  Paul  has  recently  detailed,  namely  the  opposition  of  the 
“flesh”  described  in  ch.  7,  as  well  as  the  “groaning”  and  “weakness”  more 
recently described in ch. 8. Warfield comments:  
  He [God] will so govern all things that we shall reap only good from all that befalls 
us.  All,  though  for  the  present  it  seems  grievous;  all,  though  it  be  our  sin  itself,  as 
Augustine  properly  saw  and  as  the  context  demands  (for  is  not  the  misery  of  the 
seventh chapter the misery of indwelling sin, and is not the joy of the closing verses 
of  the  eighth  chapter  the  joy  of  salvation  from  sin?)all,  there  is  no  exception 
allowed:  in  all  things  God  cooperates  so  with  us  that  it  can  conduce  only  to  our 
good . . . our eternal good obviously.
81
 
  Who then participates in this divinely planned journey? Only those who are “the 
called  (1:7)  according  to  His  purpose,”  that  is  His  prÒqesij,  prothesis,  or 
“setting/placing  before(Eph.  1:11;  3:11;  II  Tim.  1:9).”  They  are  those  effectually 
called,  according  to  sovereign  appointment,  who  consequently  “love  [the]  God.” 
Again, it is the Holy Spirit who conducts safe passage so that He has no defections 
(John 17:12; Phil. 1:6; II Thess. 2:13-14). He is the administrator of the Father’s 
sovereign will. Warfield further adds: 
  The fundamental thought here is the universal government of God. All that comes to 
you  is  under  His  controlling  hand.  The  secondary  thought  is  the  favor  of  God  to 
those  that  love  Him.  If  He  governs  all,  then  nothing  but  good  can  befall  those  to 
whom  He  would  do  good.  The  consolation  lies  in  the  shelter  which  we  may  thus 
find beneath His almighty arms. . . . [Nevertheless] [i]t is concerning sinners that he 
[Paul] is writing .
82
  
  Certainly  Joseph’s  brethren,  participants  in  an  earthly  salvation,  qualified  in  this 
respect. 
  Thus  we  recall  the  present  situation  of  Christians  to  whom  Paul  writes.  They 
suffer  without  and  experience  conflict  and  weakness  within.  But  reassurance  is 
stimulated  by  the  thought  that  the  sovereign  indwelling  Spirit  will  preserve  them 
unto a good and glorious end. Through the indomitable perseverance of the Spirit, 
they  shall  consequently  persevere.  Hence  the  authentic  Christian  can  join  with 
Paul in agreeing, “Yes, this blessed truth we do assuredly believe and know!”  
 
b.  Predestined conformity to the image of Christ, v. 29. 
 
  The  striking  certainty  of  Paul’s  preceding  assertion,  and  his  expectation  that 
Christians  generally  should  appreciate  such  truth,  prompts  explanation  that  has 
been  called  the  “Golden  Chain”  comprised  of  five  aorist  verbs  or  links,  namely 
foreknowledge,  predestination,  calling,  justification,  and  glorification.  The 
                                              
81
  Warfield, Faith & Life, pp. 204-5, 210. Also Haldane, Romans, pp. 401-2. 
82
  Ibid., pp. 204, 210. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  257
sequence here may be likened to an architect who first conceives of an attractive 
building  project  in  his  mind  (foreknowledge);  then  he  produces  specific  plans 
based  upon  this  thinking  (predestination),  after  which  construction  materials  are 
selected (calling); then the foundation is laid (justification) that inevitably leads to 
completion  of  the  edifice  (glorification).  The  sovereign  connectedness  here 
expounds in greater detail upon God’s good purpose for the called who love Him. 
 
(1)  Foreknowledge,  proginèskw,  proginosko¯ ,  can  mean  simply  to  know  in 
advance (Acts 26:5; II Pet. 3:17), yet other references ( Acts 2:23; Rom. 11:2; 
I Pet. 1:2, 20) suggest that here Paul describes God’s “forelove” (Deut. 7:7-8; 
Jer. 1:5; Amos 3:2). As Murray contends in rejecting prescience or the mere 
foresight of saving faith, “It should be observed that the text says ‘whom he 
foreknew’;  whom  is  the  object  of  the  verb  and  there  is  no  qualifying 
addition. . . . It means ‘whom he set regard upon ‘ or ‘whom he knew from 
eternity with distinguishing affection and delight’ and is virtually equivalent 
to ‘whom he foreloved’.”
83
  
 
(2)  Predestination, proÒrizw, proorizo¯ , logically, if not chronologically, describes 
“setting  a  boundary  around  beforehand,”  akin  to  foreordination,  whereby 
God  marks  out  in  eternity  past  those  who  he  set  His  love  upon  (Acts  4:28; 
Eph.  1:4-5,  11;  I  Cor.  2:7).  Paul’s  doctrine  here  is  rooted  in,  as  Warfield 
states,“a personal God . . . according to whose will . . . all that comes to pass 
must be ordered [by Him].” But further, “he [Paul] too was a predestinarian 
because  of  his  general  doctrine  of  salvation,  in  every  step  of  which  the 
initiative  must  be  taken  by  God’s  unmerited  grace.,”
84
  as  Ephesians  1:5-6 
indicates.  Further,  the  Apostle  reveals  a  motive  of  love  and  not  some 
dispassionate decree concerning why He chooses who He chooses (Eph. 1:4-
5; 2:4; Col. 3:12; I Thess. 1:4; II Thess. 2:13, 16).
85
  
But the distinct point here is the design of God’s predestinating love which is 
that  those  particularly  chosen  unto  salvation  might  “become  conformed  to 
the  image  of  His  Son.”  In  other  words,  “He  [God  the  Father]  chose  us  in 
Him [Christ] before the foundation of the world, that we would be holy and 
blameless  before  Him  [God  the  Father].”  (Eph.  1:4).  Thus  election  is  not 
unto  presumption,  but  inner  as  well  as  outer  conformity,  sÚmmorfoj, 
summorphos,  to  the  e„kèn,  eiko¯ n,  or  likeness  of  the  glorified  Christ.  While 
present spiritual metamorphosis is not excluded here (12:1-2), yet the thrust 
of  encouragement  is  that  future  hope  of  vs.  18-19  (cf.  Phil.  3:21;  I  Cor. 
15:49).  So  at  that  climactic  occasion,  Christ  shall  be  acknowledged  as  “the 
firstborn [high ranking, honored heir, most blessed] among many brethren” 
(cf. I Cor. 15:20), that is the “head of the body, the church” (Col. 2:18), the 
Bridegroom who receives His purchased bride (Rev. 19:7-9).    
 
   
   
                                              
83
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 316. 
84
  B. B. Warfield, Biblical and Theological Studies, p. 308. Refer also to the whole article on “predestination,” 
pp. 270-333. 
85
  John Murray, Collected Writings, 1, pp. 70-71. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  258
c.  Predestined glorification, v. 30. 
 
The resumption of the argument reminds us that we are considering “these whom 
He  [God]  predestined,”  that  is  the  “called”  and  “we”  or  saints  of  v.  28,  indeed 
the “sons of God,” vs. 14-15. 
 
(1)  Calling  bridges  predestination  and  justification;  it  is  directed  by  the  plan  of 
God  toward  those  whom  He  foreloved  so  that  by  it  the  elect  might  be 
gathered for their salvation and incorporation into the body of the redeemed; 
here God moves out of the arena of His decree so as to address this polluted 
world  and  focus  His  word  of  sovereign  grace  upon  the  elect  presently 
dwelling  in  the  far  country.  Therefore  “calling”  involves  that  particular 
prevenient grace of God whereby the chosen are drawn with cords of love to 
the  embrace,  through  faith,  of  Christ  crucified.  Again,  this  is  “effectual 
calling”  that  is  ultimately  irresistible  since  the  thought  of  forfeiture  is  not 
consistent with the obvious certainty that is essential to Paul’s argument here 
(cf.  I  Cor.  1:1,  2,  9,  24,  26;  II  Tim.  1:9).  This  calling  is  addressed  to  the 
predestined, not the world at large. It is as Packer defines, “God summoning 
men by his word, and laying hold of them by his power, to play a part in and 
enjoy the benefits of his gracious redemptive purpose.”
86
 
 
(2)  Justification,  notwithstanding  the  earlier  emphasis  on  faith  alone  as  the 
linkage  to  salvation,  is  the  work  of  God,  as  the  other  four  links  and  v.  33 
amply support. It is He who brought the Christians at Rome to this point of 
righteous  standing  with  their  Maker.  The  backward  linkage  suggests  that 
such  decisive  reconciliation  is  associated  with  the  wooing  and  regenerating 
Spirit  (II  Thess.  2:13;  I  Pet.  1:1-2);  the  forward  linkage  suggests  that  such 
abiding  reconciliation  will  result  in  inevitable  glorification.  Hence,  the 
Christian is to reflect, not merely on the fact of his justification, as significant 
as  it  is,  but  rather  the  continuum  of  God’s  dealing  with  him  from  eternity 
past  to  eternity  future  since  this  panoramic  perspective  will  be  far  more 
reassuring. 
 
(3)  Glorification  refers  to  “the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  to  us,”  v.  18,  “the 
revealing of the sons of God,” v. 18, and “the redemption of our body,” v. 
23.  Like  the  other  links,  it  is  also  an  aorist  that  describes  this  future  event 
proleptically,  that  is  so  certain  as  to  be  considered  accomplished  in  the 
present.  Most  significant  is  Paul’s  linking  of  justification  with  glorification 
without  any  mention  of  intervening  sanctification.  Actually  it  would  be 
better to suggest that for Paul sanctification is implicit here. As Lloyd-Jones 
explains: “[T]here is no need to mention it [sanctification] as a separate step. 
Indeed,  as  Paul  points  out,  the  very  facts  that  we  have  the  new  nature  and 
the new outlook, that we are dead to sin and risen with Christ, that we are 
‘in Christ’ and ‘alive unto righteousness’–all this guarantees sanctification.”
87
 
However,  this  manner  of  expression  here  does  reinforce  the  Apostle’s 
repeated  emphasis  concerning  the  security  that  the  Christian  presently  has. 
                                              
86
  J. I. Packer, “Calling,” Baker’s Dictionary of Theology, p. 108. 
87
  Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:17-39, pp. 260-1. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  259
The  point  is  that  the  believer  who  is  genuinely  justified  will  certainly  be 
glorified. “[I]f you are called, you are justified, and if you re justified, you are 
glorified.  Your  glorification  is  as  certain  as  the  fact  that  you  are  now  a 
Christian. No matter what may happen to you, or what the world, the flesh, 
the devil and all hell may do to you, nothing can ever make any difference to 
your position.”
88
 
 
3.  Through the assurance of ultimate conquest, vs. 31-39. 
 
  Now  Paul  makes  a  mighty  thrust  by  way  of  application  based  upon  the  preceding 
truth. Here is doctrinal extrapolation of the highest order; it is a rapturous finale that is 
intended  to  elicit  intense  and  fervent  agreement,  a  quenchless  and  joyous  certitude. 
Notice the Godward thrust of Paul’s argument here, that is the fact that the sum total 
of  his  reasoning  concerns  the  saving  and  securing  character  of  God  as  the  believer’s 
ultimate hope. 
 
a.  God the Father is for us against all opposition, vs. 31-32. 
 
  In  a  world  that  scrambles  to  find  God,  that  believes  God  is  to  be  discovered  by 
human  reasoning  and  investigation,  we  find  the  Bible  declares  the  opposite, 
namely  that  God  is  only  known  by  His  self-revelation.  This  saving  initiative  is 
judicially  represented  here.  After  all,  in  any  trial  it  is  the  character  of  the  judge 
that  will  determine  the  destiny  of  the  accused.  Hence  Barrett  comments:  “The 
question is not whether we are on God’s side, but whether he is on ours.”
89
 
 
(1)  The Father defends us against all things, v. 31. 
 
 Like  3:5;  4:1,“What  then  shall  we  say  to  these  things?”  invites  sacred 
argument  concerning  the  force  of  truth  embodied  in  both  the  preceding 
golden  chain  and  overall  gospel  revelation  that  vs.  32-34  appear  to 
encompass.
90
 The “if” clause assumes the proposition to be true so that we 
could translate, “Since God is for us, who is against us?” 
 Literally  we  read:  “If  the  God  [of  Abraham]  is  on  our  behalf  [one  who 
defends  our  case,”],  then  who  is  [able  to  sustain  any  accusation]  against 
us?” Cranfield explains, like Calvin, that “God is on our side,” and such a 
statement  is  “a  concise  summary  of  the  gospel.”
91
  What  evidence  then  is 
there  that  supports  this  more  effectual  advocacy  of  God?  Included  in  the 
gospel  would  be  substitution,  representation,  adoption,  and  grace 
endowment; but surely the thrust here is the eternal and unstoppable design 
of  God  for  us  that  originates  in  eternity  past  and  will  certainly  be 
accomplished  in  eternity  future.  “God  for  us”  is  guaranteed  by  the  golden 
chain, void of any weak link, that God has forged. 
                                              
88
  Ibid., p. 259. 
89
  Barrett, Romans, p. 172. 
90
  Stott sees “five convictions” in v. 28, “five affirmations” in vs. 29-30, and here the first of “five questions” in 
vs. 31-35. Romans, pp. 246-60. 
91
  Cranfield, Romans, I, p. 435. He refers to the parallel use of Øpšr, huper, here in Mark 9:40. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  260
 However,  it  is  soberingly  implicit  that  God  is  not  for  everyone,  but  rather 
against a great multitude. The Old Testament supports this truth, both with 
regard  to  backslidden  Israel  (Num.  25:3),  and  especially  paganism  as 
represented  by  Babylon  (Jer.  51:24-5),  Nineveh  (Nah.  3:5),  Egypt  (Ezek. 
29:9-10), Tyre and Sidon, Edom (Ezek. 26:3; 28:22), etc.  
  “Who”  then  is  against  participants  in  the  golden  chain  of  God’s  sovereign 
mercy?  Those  children  of  “the  accuser  of  the  brethren”  (Rev.  12:10)  who 
indict God’s elect, the seed of the world, the flesh, and the devil, who inflict 
every  imaginable  form  of  evil,  vs.  33-36  But  in  spit  of  this  onslaught, 
nothing  that  man  engineers  can  break  the  chain  that  God  has  forged,  for 
nothing is “able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus 
our Lord,” v. 39. So Charles Wesley has written: 
    Surrounded by a host of foes, 
       Stormed by a host of foes within, 
    Nor swift to flee, nor strong to oppose, 
       Single, against hell, earth, and sin, 
    Single, yet undismayed, I am: 
       I dare believe in Jesu’s name. 
    What though a thousand hosts engage, 
       A thousand worlds, my soul to shake? 
    I have a shield shall quell their rage, 
       And drive the alien armies back; 
    Portrayed it bears a bleeding Lamb: 
       I dare believe in Jesu’s name.   
Thus we conclude that if God is for us in the manner that is here described, 
in  spite  of  the  whole  world  being  against  He  and  us,  consequently  we  are 
most enthusiastically for God in worship, praise, and faith obedience. 
 
(2)  The Father gives us all things with Christ, v. 32. 
 
Further evidence of “God being for us” is now forthcoming through the use 
of  sanctified  logic  (cf.  5:9-10),  that  is  arguing  from  a  greater  premise  to  a 
lesser conclusion. The major premise may be expanded in translation: “God 
the Father, prefigured by Abraham’s offering of Isaac (Gen. 22:16), did not 
spare  His  own  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  as  pagan  gods  might,  but  on  behalf  of  us 
all He determined to deliver Him up as an atoning sacrifice.” The emphasis 
here  is  upon  what  God  has  done  by  sovereign  determination,  certain 
accomplishment,  without  any  thought  of  contingency.  God  did  it!  Period! 
He offered His Son; the world did not originate this sacrifice even though it 
accountably  participated  in  it  (Isa. 53:4,  6, 10;  Acts  2:23; 4:27-8).  Further, 
the divine intent was to “save His people from their sins” (Matt. 1:21), that 
is  “us  all” here,  and not  potentially  or  hopefully  but  actually.  Further,  and 
the  context bears  this  out,  such  an offering  was  not  provided  in a  vacuum, 
but  rather  as  integral  to  that  accomplished  via  the  inseverable  chain  of  vs. 
29-30.  
Thus  the  minor  conclusion  is  posed  in  the  form  of  an  unanswerable 
question. How then is it possible for “God the Father not freely to give us all 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  261
[the]  things,  in  conjunction  with  Christ?”  But  what  are  “the  all  things”? 
Strictly  they  are  not  the  “all  things”  of  v.  28  which  oppose  our  Christian 
progress, but the broad spectrum of the gracious benefits incorporated in the 
golden  chain.
92
  Thus  if  we  have  become  united  with  Christ,  then  we  have 
become  partakers of “the  all  things” that  are included  from  foreknowledge 
through  to  glory  (cf.  I  Cor.  3:21-23).  Therefore  the  Christian  under  trial  is 
secure  in  the  knowledge  that  present  spiritual  union  with  Christ,  vs.  14-18 
guarantees ultimate deliverance and glorification. 
So Lloyd-Jones concludes in commenting on this verse: 
If  He  [God]  has  ‘foreknown’  you  He  has  ‘predestinated’  you,  and  if  He  has 
‘predestinated’  you  He  has  ‘called’  you,  and  ‘justified’  you:  and  if  He  has 
‘justified’  you  He  has  already  ‘glorified’  you.  His  love  sees  the  end  from  the 
beginning, and He has given you absolute proof of it on the Cross in order that 
you  might  enjoy  the  assurance  and  the  happiness  of  salvation  even  while  you 
are in this world of sin and woe and evil and shame. Do you constantly work 
out this mighty logic?
93
 
 
b.  God the Father justifies us against any accusation, vs. 33-34. 
 
  While  there  is  one  saving  purpose  with  regard  to  “those  who  are  the  called 
according  to  His  [God’s]  purpose,”  yet  a  distinct  saving  relationship  becomes 
evident between the Father who delivers the verdict concerning justification of His 
elect,  v.  33,  and  the  Son  who  obediently  obtains  the  righteous  ground  of  that 
justification, v. 34. More broadly, and in drawing upon Isaiah 50:8-9, this scene 
may  be  likened  to  the  relationship  between  a  righteous  judge,  the  accused  for 
whom  the  judge  has  merciful  interest,  and  the  counsels  for  the  prosecution  and 
defense, in a courtroom setting.
94
 
 
(1)  God the Father declares justification, v. 33. 
 
  It is the wielding of His gavel that determines the outcome of the prisoner in 
the  dock,  not  the  accusations  of  Satan  or  his  agents.  However,  his  every 
ruling  must  be  just.  The  “elect  of  God”  here  are  the  “foreloved”  and 
“predestined,” the “chosen” ones, ™klektÒj, eklektos, (cf. 16:13; Col. 3:12; 
II  Tim.  2:10;  Tit.  1:1),  from  which  is  derived  the  English  “eclectic.” 
Hence, “Who can successfully obtain a guilty verdict against God’s elect? 
Obviously  none  since,  “God  is  the  one  who  is  justifying  [present  tense] 
these accused,” cf. I John 1:9. Thus Lenski comments that here, “lies the 
entire  doctrine  of  justification  as  presented  in  3:21  etc.  The  elect  are 
constantly  justified.  God  does  not  ignore  the  sins  they  still  commit,  he 
pardons  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ  whom  the  elect  embrace  through 
faith:  ‘he  daily  and  richly  forgives  all  sins  to  me  and  all  believers’ 
                                              
92
  John  Gill,  The  Cause  of  God  and  Truth,  p.  102.  Gary  Long,  Definite  Atonement,  pp.  10,  111;  Murray; 
Romans, I, p. 326; Redemption Accomplished and Applied, p. 9. 
93
 Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:17-39, p. 399. 
94
 Lloyd-Jones expounds upon this whole legal scenario in a most illuminating and practical way. Romans, 8:17-
39, pp. 404-412. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  262
(Luther).”
95
  The  inference  then  is  that  to  accuse  God’s  elect  is  to  in  fact 
impugn His righteous jurisdiction, which behavior He will not tolerate in 
His courtroom! 
  However,  what  specifically  is  this  declaration  of  justification?  It  is  both 
the  negative  verdict  of  acquittal  (guilt  justly  removed)  and  the  positive 
verdict  of  approval  (righteousness  justly  imputed).  The  following  verse 
elaborates on the Judge’s full righteous provision in this regard.    
 
(2)  God the Son implements justification, v. 34. 
 
  In  v.  31  the  troubled  believer  faces  those “against” him;  in  v.  33  he  faces  a 
related  accusatory  “charge,”  while  here  he  comes  under  “condemnation.” 
This  adversarial  onslaught  is  both  subjective  involving  his  “own  heart”  (I 
John  3:20),  and  objective  concerning  the  trials  of  v.  35  as  well  as  personal, 
even  justifiable  criticism  from  without,  both  presently  and  at  the  day  of 
judgment.  However,  as  was  noted  with  regard  to  Warfield’s  comment 
concerning  “all  things”  in  v.  28,  it  is  the  subjective,  inner  wrestlings  with 
personal sin, weakness, and self- accusation that most easily shake Christian 
assurance and are in mind here.
96
 Nevertheless, the assailed child of God has 
“an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He Himself is 
the  propitiation  for  our  [his]  sins”  (I  John  2:1-2).  Thus  Paul  describes  this 
defense  attorney  as  he  who,  through  acceptable  atonement  (substitutionary 
payment), enables God to be both “just and the justifier of the one who has 
faith in Jesus” (3:26). Christ’s advocacy involves four elements. The first two 
(both aorist tense) describe what Christ has done, namely “died” and “risen” 
from  the  dead.  The  second  two  (both  present  tense)describe  what  Christ  is 
presently  doing  ,  that  is  “sitting”  and  “interceding”  for  those  he  has 
redeemed.  Indeed  it  is  the  fourth  element  that  is  most  crucial  to  Paul’s 
argument, in harmony with Hebrews 7:25; I John 2:1. The point is that those 
Christians  who  are  presently  assailed  with  “conflicts  without,  fears  within” 
(II Cor. 7:5) yet have ongoing legal representation before God in His heaven, 
even such an attorney who has never lost a case and is the most intimate of 
friends with the presiding Judge, that is His beloved Son! 
Thus  the  answer  to  subjective  woundings  and  piercings  that  result  from 
accusatory arrows, is to be found in the objective saving work of Christ, not 
my  own  inner  reasonings  which  are  so  frail,  fallible,  and  clouded  by 
misunderstanding.  It  is  the  outer  concrete  advocacy  of  Christ  that  gives  me 
solid ground to stand upon. So Jonathan Edwards declares: 
The  sweetest  joys  and  delights  I  have  experienced,  have  not  been  those  that 
have  arisen  from  a  hope  of  my  own  good  estate;  but  in  a  direct  view  of  the 
glorious things of the gospel. When I enjoy this sweetness, it seems to carry me 
above  the  thoughts  of  my  own  estate.  It  seems,  at  such  times,  a  loss  that  I  
 
 
                                              
95
 R. C. H. Lenski, Romans, 573. He also draws attention to the present tense of dikaiÒw, dikaioo¯  in 3:24, 26.   
96
  So  Moo,  Godet.  Thomas  Manton  especially  lists  unbelief,  dullness,  deadness,  lust,  sorrow,  discouragement, 
poverty, sickness, and conscience in general, Works, 12, pp. 321-2., 349. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  263
cannot  bear,  to  take  off  my  eye  from  the  glorious  pleasant  object  I  behold 
without me, to turn my eye in upon myself, and my own good estate.
97
 
So  Johann  Rothe,  the  German  Moravian,  directs  us  to  this  same  ground  of 
assurance.  
Now I have found the ground wherein 
   Sure my soul’s anchor may remain 
The wounds of Jesus, for my sin 
   Before the world’s foundation slain; 
Whose mercy shall unshaken stay, 
   When heaven and earth are fled away. 
With faith I plunge me in this sea, 
   Here is my hope, my joy, my rest; 
Hither, when hell assails, I flee, 
   I look into my Savior’s breast: 
Away, sad doubt and anxious fear! 
   Mercy is all that’s written there 
Though waves and storms go o’er my head, 
   Though strength, and health, and friends be gone, 
Though joys be withered all and dead, 
   Though every comfort be withdrawn, 
On this my steadfast soul relies 
   Father, Thy mercy never dies! 
Fixed on this ground will I remain, 
   Though my heart fail and flesh decay; 
This anchor shall my soul sustain, 
   When earth’s foundations melt away: 
Mercy’s full power I then shall prove, 
   Loved with an everlasting love. 
 
c.  God the Son loves the called unto triumph, vs. 35-37. 
 
From the moment of his conversion, the Christian commences an earthly journey 
fraught with opposition of every kind, and this was the life pattern of the Apostle 
Paul, even as he followed in the steps of his Master. Hence the great challenge for 
any Christian pilgrim is overcoming these difficulties (Matt. 10:22; Acts 9:14-15;I 
Pet. 2:21; Rev. 2:7, 11, 17, 26; 3:5, 12, 21; 21:7). So Romans has addressed this 
same  problem  insofar  as  the  ongoing  life  of  the  believer  is  concerned.  It  is 
appropriately introduced in 5:1-5 as “tribulation” which follows as a consequence 
of  justification.  Then  in  chapters  6-7  the  internal  aspect  of  this  struggle  is 
confronted, that of the “law in the members of my body waging war against the 
law of my mind” (7:23), followed in chapter 8 by a Spirit of adoption that causes 
hope to rise above present “sufferings” and “groanings” (8:15, 18, 23-25). In vs. 
31-34  the  conflict  is  described  in  legal  terms.  Now  a  more  broad  portrayal  of  a  
                                              
97
 Quoted by Joseph Tracy, The Great Awakening, p. 214. William Bridge the Puritan similarly writes: “When a 
man draws his comfort only from something that he finds within himself; from grace that he finds within, and 
not from grace without; from Christ within, and not from Christ without, then his comfort will not hold.” A 
Lifting up for the Downcast, pp. 35-6. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  264
whole  catalogue  of  potent  adversaries  is  described  as  being  vanquished  by  the 
omnipotent and redeeming love of God. 
 
(1)  We are inseparable from the love of Christ, vs. 35-36. 
 
Again  recall  the  oppression  which  the  Christians  in  Rome  endured.  For  as 
Shedd  points  out:  “The  Roman  regarded  the  Christian  as  a  cheap  and 
common  victim.”
98
  While  they  might  have  gained  a  reputation  of  love  for 
one  another  within  a  despised  lower  class, yet  in  their  worldly  poverty  and 
torment the mocking comment would have been hurled at them: “But where 
is the love of Christ for you now?” even as Christ was ridiculed, “He trusts 
in God; let God rescue Him now, if He delights in Him” (Matt. 27:43). 
 
(a)  In spite of death variously, v. 35. 
 
An expanded translation reads: “Who will separate us from the love 
of  Christ  which  he  has  actively  directed  toward  us  (subjective 
genitive)?”  Here  Paul  draws  upon  his  own  experience  of  opposition 
that  attempts  to  alienate  him  from  his  Redeemer  (I  Cor.  4:11-13; 
15:30-31; II Cor. 11:26-27; 12:10). We might add here not only the 
threat of sickness and false religions, but also the contemporary foes 
of  secularism,  modernity,  liberalism  and  socialism.  The  implicit 
negative answer is reserved for the finale of vs. 37, 39. 
 
(b)  In spite of death daily, v. 36. 
 
For  Paul  persecution  is  a  daily  matter  (I  Cor.  15:31),  an  expected 
hazard  that  nevertheless  may  surprise  less  mature  believers.  Hence  he 
quotes  Psalm  44:22  in  support  of  v.  35.  “For  Your  sake,”  would 
suggest  that  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  “we  are  being  put  to  death  all  day 
lone,”  while  in  Psalm  44:22  the  reference  is  to  “God.”  The  apostolic 
expectation  is  that  Christians  will  distinguish  themselves  in  their 
contrast with the world, not their capitulation to the world. Further, the 
Christian  response  is  not  one  of  that  militancy  which  the  world 
employs;  such  judgment  must  be  left  to  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  and 
his example (I Pet. 2:21-23; Rev. 6:15-17). 
 
(2)  We are conquerors by the love of Christ, v. 37. 
 
An expanded translation reads: “But by way of stark contrast, in all of these 
various  trials  that  oppose  our  faith,  we  are  continuously  and  gloriously 
excelling  in  victory  by  means  of  he,  that  is  Christ,  who  loved  us.”  The 
victory here is Øpernik£w, hupernikao¯ , a compound that strengthens the idea 
of victory to supravictory or supreme victory or ultimate victory. The means 
of this victory is through Christ who “loved us” aorist, cf. 5:6-8; this is not 
love in general, but rather that atoning love which was manifest at a point of 
time,  in  death,  resurrection,  session,  and  intercession,  v.  34.  Hence,  this 
                                              
98
  William Shedd, Romans, p. 269. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  265
victory  includes  the  conquest  of  death  by  Christ  for  his  seed  (Eph.  4:7-10; 
Col.  2:13-15),  and  thus  no  opposition  can  take  away  the  prospect  of 
consummate life and dominion with Christ. And for “the called according to 
His purpose,” such a destiny is secure and certain. But further, as Cranfield 
points  out,  such  triumph  “is  not  through  any  courage,  endurance  or 
determination of our own, but through Christ, and not even by our hold on 
Him but by His hold on us”
99
 (I John 4:19). 
 
d.  God the Father loves the called in His Son, vs. 38-39. 
 
“For  I  am  convinced”  or  “I  have  become  persuaded”  is  not  only  a  logical 
conclusion with regard to Paul’s argument thus far, but also an expression of his 
desire for the Christians at Rome to have a similar measure of assurance. For such 
faith  can  conquer  an  empire  rather  than  be  subject  to  it.  Paul’s  martyrdom  was 
not  a  victory  for  the  power  of  Caesar,  but  rather  a  confessions  of  its  failure  to 
subdue the truth, even as was the case with the crucifixion of Christ. Further, it is 
arguable that one man Paul, as a servant of God, accomplished infinitely more in 
this world than ever any one Roman did! 
 
(1)  His infinite love overcomes all opposition, v. 38-39a. 
 
Concerning  opposition  to  biblical  Christianity,  Paul  concludes  by  moving 
from  the  more  personal  of  v.  35  to  the  universal,  from  the  material  to  the 
spiritual,  from  the  immanent  to  the  transcendent.  Concerning  the  religious 
climate  of  the  first  century,  Barrett  comments:  “Paul  turns  to  what  his 
readers  probably  regarded  as  their  chief  and  most  dangerous  enemies,  the 
astrological powers by which (as many in the Hellenistic world believed) the 
destiny of mankind was controlled.”
100
 
 
(a)  Death  and  life.  The  frustrations  of  temporal  human  existence  and 
destiny are conquered by Christ and not vice versa. Death frustrates life 
and  life  is  shrouded  in  death.  Death  is  so  pervasive,  humiliating  and 
inevitable  while  life  is  so  fleeting.  But  this  tyranny  cannot  subdue 
Christ; the reverse is the reality, even as Christ presently “is at the right 
hand of God,” v. 35. 
 
(b)  Angels  (good/bad?)  and  principalities  or  rulers  (earthly/spiritual?)  The 
context  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  these  are  opposing  spiritual 
forces. But “angels” usually refers to “good angels,” in which case Paul 
may be using hyperbole (cf. Gal. 1:8). 
 
(c)  Present  and  future  things  or  things  to  come.  Christ  has  conquered  the 
temporal world with the provision of eternal life. But the emphasis here 
on “things to come” certainly punctures the idea that human autonomy 
alone can “disqualify the called,” “break the golden chain,” and here be  
 
                                              
99
  Cranfield, Romans, I, p. 441. 
100
 Barrett, Romans, p. 174. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  266
the unspoken future exception to Paul’s train of thought. Rather Christ 
is the absolute guarantee of a secure future. 
 
(d)  Powers.  These  may  be  higher  ranking  spirit  beings  with  regard  to  the 
“miracles”  and  “wonders”  which  they  are  able  to  activate  (cf.  I  Cor. 
15:24;  II  Cor.  12:12;  Eph.  1:21).  Whatever,  no  inexplicable 
manifestation,  no  wonders  from  the  magicians  of  Egypt,  can  keep  us 
from the riches of grace that are in Christ Jesus. 
 
(e)  Height  and  depth.  To  be  even  more  encompassing,  in  an  exalted 
manner of speaking, Paul includes the spectrum of from heaven to earth 
to  hell  itself,  which  perspective  so  deflates  the  size  of  our  present 
anxieties. So we sing: 
From Him who loves me now so well 
   What power my soul can sever? 
Shall life, or death, or earth, or hell? 
   No I am His forever. 
 
(f)  Any  created  thing.  Thus  no  power  outside  of  God  the  Creator  can 
thwart  His  sovereign  and  gracious  intention  for  His  elect.  This  final 
hedge around Paul’s premise of absolute security in Christ allows for no 
exceptions, otherwise a believer may yet slip through God’s fingers! 
 
(2)  His infinite love is mediated by Jesus Christ, v. 39b. 
 
Thus  the  conclusion  is  that,  “nothing,  except  or  plus  nothing,  is  able  to 
alienate the authentic Christian from the love of God toward us, namely that 
same  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.”  Again  the  subjective  genitive 
focuses on the sovereign love which God exercises toward those who He has 
called.  The  administration  of  this  love  is  mediated  through  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ, yet the love of the Father and the Son are essentially identical. 
But  for  the  oppressed  Christian  in  Rome,  there  can  be  little  comfort  if  the 
whole of this triumphant declaration yet rests on the vital pivot of our own 
choosing to continue in the faith. The whole argument here falls apart if the 
will of man is the ultimate determinant in his destiny; it then in fact becomes 
the supreme issue which yet, some would say, is an assumption. Rather, the 
Christian  in  Rome  would  have  read  this  climactic  assertion  with  renewed 
confidence  for,  as  Jonah  acknowledged  in  a  most  threatening  situation  that 
he was enabled to rise above, “Salvation is from the LORD” (Jonah 2:9). 
Thus Lloyd-Jones concludes: “God never starts a process and then gives it up 
uncompleted.  What  God  starts  He  finishes.  .  .  .  To  say  that  a  man  whom 
God starts saving could subsequently be lost would mean that God has been 
defeated by the devil. That is impossible. God’s character and honor demand 
that a man who has been justified should finally be glorified, and His power 
guarantees it.”
101
 
                                              
101
 Lloyd-Jones, Romans, 8:17-39, p. 456. 
THE REIGN OF GRACE THROUGH THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL  267
    The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose, 
       I will not, I cannot, desert to its foes; 
    That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake, 
       I’ll never, no never, no never forsake!     
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER XI 
 
ROMANS 9:1-33 - THE GOSPEL AND 
 ISRAEL’S ELECTION 
 
 
 MORE superficial assessment of Romans 9-11 might lead one to believe that this section is a 
distinct unit, especially since there appears to be little continuity with the exultant conclusion 
of  chapter  8.  Furthermore,  it  has  been  noted  that  some  degree  of  continuity  can  be  discerned, 
after the manner of Paul’s other writings where doctrine is followed by duty, if chapters 8 and 12 
are read consecutively.
1
 Nevertheless there do seem to be substantial reasons why Paul makes this 
seemingly abrupt injection of the whole matter, concerning the righteousness of God in relation 
to Israel and the gospel, that in fact has deep connectedness. 
First  there  needs  to  be  recollection  of  1:16  where  the  gospel  is  to  be  offered  “to  everyone  who 
believes,  to  the  Jew  first  and  also  to  the  Greek,”  which  principle  the  Lord  Jesus  revealed  to 
Ananias, namely that Paul was to bear My [Christ’s] name before the Gentiles and kings and the 
sons  of  Israel”  (Acts  9:15).  As  a  result  Paul  consistently  witnessed  to  the  Jews  at  every 
opportunity, even from the beginning at Damascus following his conversion (Acts 9:22). His first 
missionary journey saw initial synagogue witness at Salamis, Pisidian Antioch, and Iconium (Acts 
13: 5, 14; 14:1). Note that Acts 13:46 reveals: “It was necessary that the Word of God be spoken 
to  you  [Jews  at  Psidian  Antioch]  first;  since  you  repudiate  it  and  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of 
eternal  life,  behold,  we  are  turning  to  the  Gentiles.”  Nevertheless,  at  the  next  stop  at  Iconium, 
Paul first visits the synagogue. His second missionary journey finds him seeking the Jews first at 
Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, Corinth, and Ephesus (Acts 16:13; 17:1, 10, 17; 18:4, 19). 
Note that Acts 18:6 records, “Your blood [that of the Jews at Athens] be on your own heads! I 
am clean. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.” Nevertheless, at the next stop at Ephesus, Paul 
first visits the synagogue. His third missionary journey finds him returning to Ephesus, but first 
to  the  synagogue  (Acts  19:8).  Paul’s  final  journey,  in  which  he  is  led  captive  to  Rome  for  trial, 
commences in Jerusalem where he witnesses in the Temple (Acts 21:26), declares to the Jews that, 
“I am a Jew” (Acts 22:3), and three days following his arrival at Rome, he “called together those 
who were the leading men of the Jews,” and declared that, “I am wearing this chain for the sake 
of the hope of Israel” (Acts 28:17, 20). It should be born in mind that Romans was received in 
Rome  from  Corinth  approximately  three  years  before  this  arrival  in  Rome  just  described.  Thus 
the  Apostle,  although  repeatedly  scorned  and  assailed  by  the  Jews,  yet  manifested  an 
indefatigable and gracious persistence with those to whom he nevertheless felt so indebted (9:4-
5). Paul was decidedly prosemitic, even when faced with the most stubborn unbelief and spiritual 
adultery  (9:1-3;  10:1;  11:1,  11;  cf.  Hosea  11:8-9).  Indeed  he  manifests  a  degree  of  ongoing 
Jewishness  that,  while  used  pragmatically  (Acts  16:1-3;  21:26),  yet  is  reflective  of  deep  love  for 
“my kinsmen according to the flesh” (9:3). Hence, no Christian should be of any lesser attitude, 
though sad to say, some Christians have been anti-Semitic both racially and theologically.
2
 
Second,  other  references  in  Romans  indicate  an  underlying  interest  in  the  destiny  of  God’s 
covenant people (2:9-10, 17-29; 3:3:1-2, 9, 29), and particularly the character of true Jewishness 
(2:28-29,  cf.  9:6-8).  It  may  well  be  that  this  emphasis,  but  especially  as  now  considered  in 
                                              
1
  John Murray, Romans, II, p. xi. 
2
  Martin Luther is one case in point. Roland H. Bainton, Here I Stand, pp. 296-8. 
A 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  269
Romans  9-11,  incorporates  much  of  the  repeated  thrust  of  Paul’s  frequent  synagogue  ministry. 
Thus this former Pharisee and student of Gamaliel was constantly sensitive to the ramifications of 
Christian  gospel  truth  as  either  an  apprehensive  unbelieving  Jew  or  a  recently  converted  Jewish 
Christian  might  assess  it  (7:1).  Consider  how  often  Paul,  on  being  rejected  by  the  Jews  in  his 
journeyings, would have reflected upon the certain covenant promises given to national Israel and 
the  overwhelming  unbelief  he  encountered.  Here  his  frequent  ruminating  on  this  matter  finds 
detailed expression. 
Third, the theme of God’s saving righteousness (1:16-17; 3:21-26; 5:17-21; 8:4) has highlighted 
the  integrity  of  God  in  saving  sinners,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile.  Paul  is  dominated  by  this 
fundamental  truth,  so  that  in  3:3  God’s  righteousness  is  not  to  be  questioned  even  “if  some 
[Jews]  did  not  believe.”  Hence  it  ought  not  surprise  us  if,  in  the  light  of  Paul’s  confessed 
Jewishness, this upholding of God’s character should arise again, in view of the covenant status 
of  Israel,  following  such  a  complete  vindication  of  the  fullness  and  universality  of  the  gospel. 
Therefore at this juncture there is good reason for maintaining that 9:6a is of crucial importance 
when it declares: “But it is not as though the word of God has failed.” Thus John Piper rightly 
argues that 9:6a declares, “the main point which Romans 9-11 was written to prove, in view of 
Israel’s  unbelief  and  rejection.  What  is  at  stake  ultimately  in  these  chapters  is  not  the  fate  of 
Israel; that is penultimate. Ultimately God’s own trustworthiness is at stake. And if God’s word 
of promise cannot be trusted to stand forever, then all our faith is in vain.”
3
 Hence, the Word of 
God has not failed, and neither has its promised dealings with Israel. 
Fourth,  we  should  consider  if  Romans  9-11  contains  any  terminology  that  is  reminiscent  of 
Romans 1-8. Most significant is the use of “righteousness,” especially in 9:30 where the Gentiles 
“attained righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith,” and 10:4 where “Christ is the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  everyone  who  believes.”  Again  in  10:6,  9-10a,  “the 
righteousness based on faith” is “that if you confess with your mouth Jesus as Lord, and believe 
in your heart that God raised Him from the dead, you will be saved; for with the heart a person 
believes, resulting in righteousness.” Surely this is recapitulation of the gospel earlier described in 
Romans.  The  reference  to  “grace”  in  11:5-6  is  similarly drawing upon  previous  gospel  doctrine 
where “grace” by its very nature is exclusive of “works,” as in 4:4-6, 13-16. 
So this excursus of Paul is very much integral to Romans as a whole. Moo wells states the issue 
here:  
Those  who  relegate  chaps.  9-11  to  the  periphery  of  Romans  have  misunderstood  the  purpose  of 
Romans 9-11, or of the letter, or of both. . . . Once we recognize the importance of this Jewish motif 
in Romans, we can give Romans 9-11 its appropriate place in the letter. In these chapters Paul is not 
simply  using  Israel  to  illustrate  a  theological  point,  such  as  predestination  (according  to  Augustine, 
[and Luther]
4
) or the righteousness of God. He is talking about Israel herself, as he wrestles with the 
implications of the gospel for God’s ‘chosen people’ of the Old Testament.
5
 . . . If Jewish rejection of 
the gospel creates the problem Paul grapples with in Romans 9-11, Gentile acceptance of that same 
gospel  exacerbates  it.  It  seems  that  Israel  has  not  only  been  disinherited  but  replaced.  Paul  earlier 
categorically  but  briefly  rejected  the  conclusion  that  his  teaching  implied  the  cancellation  of  all  the 
Jews’  advantages  (3:1-4).  Now  he  elaborates.  Of  course,  Paul  could  have  cut  the  Gordian  knot  by 
                                              
3
  John Piper, The Justification of God, p. 19. 
4
  In  Luther’s  Preface  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  pp.  25-6,  he  subtitles  chapters  9-11  “Predestination  or 
Election,” and fails to even mention Israel in this section. 
5
  In  summary  of  this  most  vital  point,  refer  to  Murray,  Romans,  II,  pp.  xii-xv.  However,  more  substantial 
support will be found in, Johannes Munck, Christ & Israel; Mark D. Nanos, The Mystery of Romans; Joseph 
Shulam with Hilary Le Cornu, A Commentary on the Jewish Roots of Romans.  
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  270
simply  claiming  that  the  church  had  taken  over  Israel’s  position  and  leaving  it  at  that.  But  what, 
then,  would  become  of  the  continuity  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  gospel?  For  the  Jewish 
claim to privileged status arises not from a self-generated nationalistic fervor; it is rooted in the Old 
Testament (Deut. 7:6b).
6
 
 
 
A.  THE APOSTOLIC APPRECIATION OF ISRAEL, VS. 1-5. 
There  is  tremendous  passion  in  this  opening  declaration  of  Paul’s  heartfelt  concern  for 
national  Israel.  Doubtless  he  is  reflective  of  his  own  past,  the  sheer  bigotry  of  it  all  (Acts 
26:5, 24; Gal. 1:14; Phil. 3:5-6), and there is nothing like sensitivity to our own sin making 
us compassionate toward others who sin in a similar fashion (I Pet. 4:8). Notice that while 
Paul may have expressed anger with the Jews in past encounters (Acts 13:46; 18:6; 23:2-5), 
yet  recall  that  following  their  attempt  to  kill  him  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  21:30-32,  36)  he 
nevertheless begged for permission to preach free grace that extended to the Gentiles before 
these violent accusers (Acts 21:39-40; 22:21-22). 
 
1.  Appreciation born of kinship, vs. 1-3. 
This is a carnal kinship, yet Paul does not deny its existence or validity, as with 3:1-4. 
So the Christian today should have similar esteem, even if the Jews he witnesses to are 
scornful  of  the  gospel.  We  ought  to  remember  that  we  are  saved  by  a  Jewish  Savior, 
have the gospel from the Jewish Scriptures, as well as mostly Jewish writers in the New 
Testament. Further, the first mother church at Jerusalem was Jewish, as were all of the 
twelve  apostles,  while  Paul  continued  to  call  himself  a  Jew.  A  Christian,  like  Paul, 
ought to dearly love the Jews, in spite of their hardness of heart. 
 
a.  Through the Spirit of Christ, v. 1. 
There is tremendous force of conviction in this oath-like declaration, cf. 1:9. If the 
composition  of  the  church  at  Rome  is  comprised  of  more  Gentiles  than  Jews,  as 
the  greetings  offered  in  16:1-23  could  indicate,  then  Paul  may  be  attempting  to 
cover the charge that his more recent teaching, with its universal distinctions, has 
inferred  that  national  Israel  no  longer  has  any  place  in  the  new  church  age  (3:9, 
22; cf. Gal. 3:28). So he immediately responds by indicating just how intensely his 
heart aches for national Israel. The reality of his yearning is akin to that of Christ 
(Matt.  23:37-39),  for  it  is  “in  Christ,”  that  is  in  union  with  Christ,  to  which 
conviction  of  conscience  the  Holy  Spirit  bears  witness.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to 
propose  that  Paul,  in  his  earlier  instruction  by  Christ  (I  Cor.  7:6,  12,  40;  11:23; 
Gal. 1:12), learned much of what he now relates concerning the gospel and Jewish 
unbelief. Here is burning concern that has divine attestation. 
 
b.  Through heartfelt concern, v. 2. 
 
In  the  light  of  Paul’s  missionary  travels,  it  is  not  difficult  to  contemplate  the 
incessant  anxiety  of  soul  that  has  resulted  from  the  incessant  opposition  he  has 
faced  from  the  Jews,  at  virtually  every  port  of  call  and  especially  Jerusalem;  his 
                                              
6
  Douglas Moo, Romans, pp. 548-50. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  271
agonizing  is  suitably  described  here  in  the  present  tense.  He  certainly  knew  of  a 
converted  remnant;  but  the  vast  majority  of  Israel  has  continued  in  its  militant 
opposition  to  his  gospel.  Yet  in  the  light  of  what  is  about  to  be  revealed  in  9:3-
11:36, this soul unrest is more akin to birth-pangs, for the Apostle is well aware 
of  the  ultimate  glorious  destiny  of  Israel.  In  this  regard,  as  Moo  indicates,  Paul 
laments  after  the  manner  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets;
7
  they  likewise  were 
grieved  at  Israel’s  unbelief  and  prospective  dispersion,  yet  at  the  same  time 
anticipated Israel’s metamorphosis at the “last days” (Deut. 4:25-31; Hos. 3:4-5; 
Zech. 12:10-14; 14:8-11).  
 
c.  Through racial alliance, v. 3. 
 
  We  expand  in  translation  here:  “For  I  was  seriously  contemplating  [imperfect 
tense] the possibility of my submission to damnation [¢n£qema, anathema], that is 
consignment  to  hell  from  Christ,  if  by  any  means  my  fellow  Jewish  brethren, 
according  to  the  flesh,  might  be  united  to  Christ.”  The  Puritans  were  known  to 
pose the question as to whether a Christian should be willing to be consigned to 
hell for the glory of God, most likely on account of this statement of Paul.
8
 Both 
situations  are  hypothetical  since  they  propose  an  attitude  that  could  only  be 
generated in the heart of a child of God, and God does not send His own children 
to hell for His own glory; such an idea would be monstrous.
9
 This is not to deny 
that apart from what God would never do, yet the child of God may selflessly so 
love  another  that  he  postulates  the  impossible,  by  way  of  hyperbole,  as  Paul 
elsewhere suggests (II Cor. 12:15), after the manner of Moses (Ex. 32:31-32). Of 
course it could also be argued that Christ was certainly willing to enter the realm 
of  the  damned  for  the  sake  of  the  Father’s  elect  (I  Pet.  3:18-20).  However,  the 
large  truth  here  is  the  Apostle’s  profound  love  for  God’s  prodigal  people,  the 
nation of Israel, which  frustration can only be blissfully relieved at the saving of 
this same nation. 
 
2.  Appreciation born of the covenants, vs. 4-5. 
 
Here  Paul  passionately  identifies  with  his  Jewish  heritage  by  exalting  in  biblical 
Judaism that reaches its apex in Jesus Christ who is “God over all.” In the luster of this 
catalogue of blessings is the reason why Paul would, if it would help, offer up his soul 
for  the  saving  of  Israel.  But  as  Moo  well  states,  there  is  also  a  hint  here,  “why  that 
sacrifice  will  not  be  necessary:  God  ‘has  not  rejected  his  people  whom  he  foreknew’ 
(11:2).”
10
  Thus  Paul’s  brethren  are  “Israelites,”  ’Israhl‹tai,  Israe¯litai,  the  descendants 
of Jacob,
11
 and the following characteristics must be carefully born in mind in the light 
of greater clarification being made in vs. 6-13. 
 
                                              
7
  Moo, Romans, p. 557. He cites the examples of Jeremiah 4:19; 14:17; Lamentations 1-5; Dan. 9:3. 
8
  Thomas Manton, Works, XXII, p. 137. 
9
  Robert  Haldane  comments:  “That  anyone  should  desire  to  be  eternally  separated  from  Christ,  and 
consequently punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, is impossible.” Romans, p. 
450. 
10
  Moo, Romans, p. 560. 
11
  This first of eleven references to “Israel/Israelite” in Romans 9-11 clearly has a national connotation. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  272
a.  Old Testament covenant blessings, vs. 4-5a. 
 
All  of  the  following  seven  categories,  each  identified  with  the  definite  article, 
pertain  to  Old  Testament  benefits  which,  in  3:1-2,  were  but  alluded  to  by  the 
singular  mention  of  “the  oracles  of  God.”  Here  Paul  accepts  the  legitimacy  of 
such “boasting,” except that in 2:17-24 it was void of holy consistency. 
 
(1)  The adoption.  In  the  light  of  Paul’s  teaching  in  8:15,  23;  Galatians  4:5; 
Ephesians  1:5,  the  application  of  “the  adoption,”  “the  son-placement”  to 
unbelieving  Israel  as  a  present  reality  is  significant,  though  consistent  with 
the  Old  Testament  (Ex.  4:22;  Deut.  14:1-2;  Isa.  63:16;  64:8;  Jer.  31:9-20; 
Hos. 11:1; Mal. 2:10). While Hodge and Murray reject any connection here, 
Piper is of the opposite and more convincing opinion.
12
 
 
(2)  The  glory.  The  immediate  thought  must  be  the  coming  of  God’s  glory  to 
Israel  in  visible  presence,  theophany  (Ex.  3:2-6),  tabernacle  worship  (Ex.. 
40:34), especially during the Exodus and wilderness wanderings (Ex. 16:10). 
This visitation was unique among the nations of the world (Deut. 14:2), the 
subject  of  boasting  in  spite  of  God  declaring  the  reason  for  their  election 
(Deut. 7:7). However the context in Romans also causes us to look forward 
to  coming  glory  as  the  major  thrust  here  (2:10;  9:23;  11:12,  15,  26-27).  So 
Piper concludes: “It is precisely this destiny of Israel that makes the problem 
of Israel’s unbelief so intense!”
13
 
 
(3)  The  covenants.  The  plural  usage  here,  akin  to  “the  covenants  of  promise” 
(Eph.  2:12),  would  include  the  Mosaic  Covenant,  but  especially  the 
Abrahamic Covenant as well as those ratifications given to Isaac (Gen. 26:1-
5),  Jacob  (Gen.  28:10-16),  and  David  (II  Sam.  7:8-17;  23:5)  that  reach 
toward  fulfillment  in  the  New  Covenant  (11:27).
14
  Implicit  here  is  the 
understanding of the irrevocable nature and certain fulfillment that is at the 
heart of these “big promises” (Gen. 15:1-21; Deut. 7:7-9; Rom. 11:27-29
15
). 
 
(4)  The  law.  Literally  we  have  ¹  nomoqes…a,  he¯  nomothesia,  or  “the 
legislation,”  that  is  the  whole  Mosaic  legal  system,  moral,  civil,  and 
ceremonial,  which  in  total  was  a  divine  revelation  exclusively  given  by 
God  to  newly  redeemed  Israel.  No  other  nation  on  earth  was  given  this 
                                              
12
  “Lexical  considerations  are  all  in  favor  of  construing  the  sonship  of  Rom.  9:4b  with  the  fullest  saving 
significance of Rom. 8:15, 23. What Murray seems to overlook is that the olive tree analogy in Rom. 11:17 
implies that whatever blessings the Church enjoys, it does so because it has been engrafted into the cultivated 
tree to share in its rich root (11:17). It is the Jews who are the ‘natural branches’ (11:21) which, though now 
broken  off  (by  a  temporary  hardening  11:7,  25),  will  be  grafted  in  again  (11:24):  ‘all  Israel  will  be  saved’ 
(11:26). If the Church enjoys divine sonship, it must remember that it does so by participating in the people 
of God which is historical Israel ‘by nature’ (i.e. by a special act of sovereign election).” Justification of God, 
p. 32. 
13
  Piper, Justification of God, p. 34. Moo has preference for this view of eschatological glory, Romans, p. 563. 
14
  Here,  as  in  all  of  Paul’s  writings,  there  is  not  the  slightest  indication  that  he  embraces  an  overarching, 
systematic  “covenant of grace” under which the “covenants of promise” are administered. 
15
  Concerning Romans 11:29, Moo, Morris, and Murray agree that “the gifts and the calling of God [that] are 
irrevocable” refer to the listing here in vs. 4-5 of Israel’s national blessings. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  273
legal  package  (Ps.  147:19-20).  Hence,  in  spite  of  its  condemning 
characteristic, the law was a gift of the engraven, inscripturated, righteous 
will of God that none else had received except the race of Abraham. Thus 
“the law” was an exclusive and precious legacy.  
 
(5)  The  [temple]  service.  This  ¹  latre…a,  he¯  latreia,  or  “the  service,”  used  in 
12:1  to  describe  “spiritual  service  of  worship,”  is  the  whole  sacrificial 
system, again a revelation from God that was unique to Judaism in a world 
full  of  paganism.  While  the  law  revealed  the  righteous  will  of  God  to 
redeemed  Israel,  and  thus  the  sin  of  God’s  people,  the  offerings  maintained 
fellowship.  Cranfield  suggests  that  synagogue  worship,  piety  in  the  home, 
prayer,  recitation  of  the  Shema  (Deut.  6:4),  etc.,  are  likely  to  be  included 
here.
16
  
 
(6)  The promises. Primarily they are the promises given to the fathers, Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  (4:13-22;  15:8;  Gal.  3:16-29;  cf.  Gen.  17:4-8;  26:3-5; 
28:10-17),  yet  more  broadly  incorporate  the  promised  blessings  of  right 
fellowship  (II  Cor.  6:16-7:1).  They  subsume  under  the  larger  covenantal 
promises,  but  particularly  find  their  consummation  in  Messiah  (Rom.  15:8; 
II Cor. 1:19-20; Gal. 3:16, 29). Yet again, these promises were only given to 
one, seemingly insignificant, chosen nation. 
 
(7)  The fathers. The expression, “whose are the father’s” has “Israelites” in v. 4 
as  its  referent,  not  “the  promises.”
17
  Thus  it  is  the  fathers  who  are  the 
progenitors of the “Israelites;” it is the fathers who are the “rich root” of the 
olive  tree  (11:17-18)  that  has  given  rise  to  the  “natural  branches”  (11:21, 
24). But further, in spite of Israel’s unbelief and severance (11:17, 19-21), yet 
“God is able to graft them in again” (11:23). Why is this so? Because, “from 
the  standpoint  of  the  gospel  they  [unbelieving  Israel]  are  enemies  for  your 
sake, but from the standpoint of God’s choice they are beloved for the sake 
of  the  fathers  [emphasis  added]”(11:28),  that  is  the  certain  covenantal 
promises. 
 
b.  New Testament covenant blessings, v. 5b. 
 
Here  we  transfer  from  the  covenants  and  promises  to  their  supreme  fulfillment, 
and  the  smooth  though  radical  transition  leads  us  to  the  primary  reason  why 
neither Israel has been finally abandoned nor the Word of God has failed. Again, 
“from whom is the Christ” has the “Israelites” in v. 4 as its referent. Here is the 
supreme  glory  of  the  Jew,  namely  that  he  is  the  progenitor  of  the  Savior  of  the 
World; further, the Savior of the World is a Jew.
18
 But Piper adds: “Paul is saying 
far more than that the Messiah is a Jew. He is stressing that, with the coming of 
                                              
16
  C. E. B. Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 463. 
17
  Piper makes it clear, with support from H. A. W. Meyer, that “whom” v. 4, “”whose” v. 5a, and “whom” v. 
5b, all refer to “Israelites” in v. 4. Justification of God, p. 21. 
18
  Calvin adds: “For if he [Christ] honored all mankind, when he coupleth himself to us by communicating our 
nature,  much  more  did  he  honor  them  [the  Israelites]  with  whom  he  would  have  a  nearer  bond  of 
conjunction.” Romans, p. 248. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  274
Christ,  the  privileges  of  Israel  have  reached  their  decisive  climax.”
19
  However  a 
danger  arises  in  suggesting  too  comprehensively  that  Messiah  has  come  from 
Israel.  So  Paul  immediately  qualifies  his  prior  statement.  He  refers  us  to  truth 
previously  taught  in  1:3-4,  concerning  Christ  as  the  theanthropic  person,  except 
that now he makes his point even more forcefully. 
 
(1)  Christ  according  to  the  flesh.  We  expand  in  translation,  that  from  the 
“Israelites”  of  v.  4,  the  blessed  people  of  God,  comes  “the  Christ,  the  one 
who  is  according  to  the  [Israelite]  flesh.”  Or  as    1:3  declares,  this  Christ, 
“was born of a descendant of David according to [the] flesh.”  
 
(2)  Christ  the  blessed  God.  A  great  debate  has  centered  on  the  question  of 
punctuating the following statement. If a period concludes, “who [Christ] is 
over  all.”  then  what  follows  is  simply  a  doxology:  “God  [the  Father  is] 
blessed  forever.  Amen.”  which  the  NIV  has  as  a  marginal  alternative.  Thus 
here  Christ  is  not  explicitly  declared  to  be  God.  But  a  comma  after  “all” 
leads  to  the  translation,  “who  [Christ]  is  over  all,  [who  is]  God  blessed 
forever.  Amen.”  which  the  KJV,  NKJV,  and  NASB  have  without  any 
marginal alternative. In this case Christ is explicitly declared to be God, and 
there are  very  good  reasons  for  defending  this translation.
20
 However,  given 
this  to  be  wondrously  true,  the  point  is  that  in  the  midst  of  a  catalog  of 
distinctive  benefits  that  have  graced  the  nation  of  Israel,  the  crowning 
blessing  is  that  of  it  being  the  earthly  incubator  of  the  Son  of  God, 
Emmanuel  (Isa.  7:14).  Hence,  the  Apostle  cherishes  this  whole  incubation 
process; it is not to be denigrated, even though the rank unbelief of the Jews 
is a present grief. The Word of God has recorded all of this birthing process; 
but  it  has  not  failed  because  of  where  we  are  presently  observing  this 
Abrahamic  saga.  We  need  wide-angle  lenses  when  we  attempt  to 
comprehend God’s dealings with Israel, and Paul in Romans 9-11 helps us to 
have this comprehensive focus. 
 
 
 
 
                                              
19
  Ibid., p. 43. 
20
  The main objection to the punctuation that declares Christ to be God is the argument that nowhere else does 
Paul make such a claim in his writings, and that in spite of Philippians 2:6; Colossians 2:9; II Thessalonians 
1:12;  Titus  2:13.  However,  the  evidence  upholding  the  expression  here  of  Christ’s  deity  is  substantial.  1. 
Most of the early church fathers were of this opinion. 2. The grammar is decidedly in favor of Christ being 
described  as  “God  blessed  forever.”  The  word  order  here  does  not  follow  the  common  expression  of  a 
doxology that would have been second nature to Paul, the highly trained Jew. Barrett comments. “[I]f Paul 
wished to say ‘Blessed be God’, he should have placed the word ‘blessed’ (eÙloghtÒj) first in the sentence, as 
he does not.” Romans, p. 179. Cranfield writes that, “the superiority of the case for taking v. 5b to refer to 
Christ  is  so  overwhelming  as  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  it  is  very  nearly  certain  that  it  ought  to  be 
accepted.” Romans, II, p. 468. Nigel Turner supports the NEB marginal translation, that is “from them [the 
patriarchs]  sprang  the  Messiah,  supreme  above  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.”  Grammatical  Insights,  p.  15.  3. 
The thrust of Paul’s reasoning strongly supports the reference to Christ’s humanity and deity in parallel with 
1:3-4;  the  Israelites  have  given  birth  to  Christ  from  their  flesh,  yet  he  is  also  divine.  But  simply  to  declare 
Christ’s human/Jewish roots and then proclaim the Father blessed, is to suddenly change course while leaving 
the doctrine of Christ in mid air, that is in terms of 1:3-4 and Paul’s doctrine of Christ described elsewhere. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  275
B.  THE MERCIFUL ELECTION OF ISRAEL, VS. 6-33. 
 
Having  given  us  a  panoramic  view  of  the  blessings  that  accrue  to  Israelites,  and  the 
intimation that God is by no means finished with the tribe of Abraham, yet Paul well knows 
just  how  easy  it  is  for  Jewish  Christians  in  particular,  as  well  as  Gentile  Christians,  to  be 
confused in this matter, and especially with regard to, first, the essential characteristics of a 
Jew in the sight of God, second, the basis upon which the Jews came into being, and third, 
of course their ultimate destiny. 
 
1.  Distinguished as children through promise, vs. 6-13. 
 
  So  Paul  goes  to  four  portions  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures,    to  deal  with  the  first  two  of 
these  problems  at  this  stage,  that  most  likely  the  congregation  at  Rome  has  already 
pondered.  This  sacred  corpus  especially  embodies  the  much  vaunted  blessings  just 
enumerated.  At  the  same  time  the  gospel  he  has  so  passionately  and  carefully 
expounded  in  chapters  1-8,  as  well  as  fruitfully  proclaimed  to  the  Gentiles,  is  closely 
related  to  this  concern.  Does  national  Israel  in  its  present  unbelief  indicate  that  the 
gospel,  while  clearly  being  effective  amongst  the  Gentiles,  is  yet  a  failure  amongst  the 
Jews,  inscripturated  blessings  notwithstanding?  Therefore,  has  this  comprehensive 
“word of God,” this grand plan of redemption failed?
21
    
 
a.  Israel’s distinctive children of promise, v. 6. 
 
  Because of the glory of the aforementioned blessings that attach to an Israelite, a 
conflict has arisen. On the one hand, Paul has expressed profound sorrow at the 
present state of Israel with regard to Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ, who has been 
spurned  by  the  nation  that  gave  him  birth.  On  the  other  hand,  he  has  just  listed 
the  glorious  benefits  of  being  an  Israelite.  So  is  the  integrity  of  God’s  Word 
brought into question at this point? If the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob are so wonderful, how come they do not find present fulfillment in national 
Israel as a whole with regard to its Messiah? Is the Word of God, the revelation of 
God’s  sure  covenant  promises,  at  fault  here  so  that  there  is  in  fact  no  certain 
destiny  for  national  Israel  in  the  light  of  the  expansion  of  the  Christian  gospel 
amongst Gentiles? In no way, although clarification is now needed. 
 Basic to the problem is a misunderstanding as to the definition of an “Israelite.” 
Hence, “they are not all Israel who are descended from Israel,” or, “they who are 
of  the  totality  of  [present  national]  Israel  are  not  [all  true]  descendants  of  Israel 
[Jacob].”
22
 From the outset, let us clear away a common misunderstanding. Paul is 
not here, by implication, indicating that a real Jew at heart now has no national 
connection  with  the  previously  listed  blessings;  further,  he  is  not  here  teaching 
that there are, along with believing Gentiles, only “spiritual” Jews in that they are 
descendants  of  Abraham  by  faith  alone.  Paul  is  not  here  saying  there  is  a  more 
broad, encompassing understanding of what it is to be a Jew. The Gentiles are not 
                                              
21
  Piper, Justification of God, pp. 48-50.  
22
  Here the second and third instances of “Israel” in Romans 9-11 both refer to national Israel, though with a 
distinction. “[T]hey are not all Israel” refers to the present inclusive nation; those “who are descended from 
Israel” comprise the remnant about to be described, 9:27; 11:5, as part of the eventual “fulfillment” or “all 
Israel” of 11:12, 26. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  276
in  mind  here;  they  are  not  mentioned  until  v.  24  where  Paul  writes  of,  “us  [the 
Roman  congregation  as  a  whole],  whom  He  [God]  also  called,  not  from  among 
Jews  only,  but  also  from  among  Gentiles.
23
    Quite  the  opposite,  the  Apostle  is 
saying there is a more narrow, restrictive focus that finds, as John Murray puts it, 
“an ‘Israel’ within ethnic Israel.”
24
 Carefully consider the context of the following 
vs. 7-13. The Jews boasted that they were of the descendants of Abraham (Matt. 
3:9;  John  8:39)  while  Paul  makes  it  disturbingly  clear  that  you  may  be  born  of 
Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob and not be an Israelite! Indeed the forthcoming Moslem 
claims  to  be  a  descendant  of  Abraham  as  well!  A  real  Jew  must  be  defined  in 
sharper  terms  with  regard  to  “the  fathers,”  cf.  v.  5!  Moo  explains:  “Paul  is  not 
saying  ‘it  is  not  only  those  who  are  Israel  that  are  Israel,’  but  ‘it  is  not  all  those 
who are of Israel that are Israel.’”
25
 
 
b.  Isaac as a distinctive child of Abraham, vs. 7-9. 
 Keeping  in  mind  Paul’s  loving  anxiety  for  unbelieving  Israel,  he  upholds  the 
Word’s integrity by expounding  the unfailing hope that it offers even to a nation 
presently  hardened.  His  argument  in  this  vein  will  continue  till  the  exultant  
doxology  at  11:33-36.  Thus  he  resorts  to  “the  father”  of  the  “fathers,”  that  is 
Abraham,  and,  in  parallel  with  v.  6b,  points  out  that  not  all  of  his  physical 
descendants or “seed”  are in fact his ”children.”   
 
(1)  Isaac received the promise, not Ishmael, v. 7. 
  It is explicitly stated that, “through Isaac your descendants will be named” 
(Gen. 21:12) while it is implicitly indicated that Ishmael has not been chosen 
to  be  a  vehicle  of  the  covenant  promise  (Gen.  17:18-21),  even  though  the 
firstborn  was  circumcised  (Gen.  17:23-26),  blessed  (Gen.  17:20),  and 
promised  national  prominence  (Gen.  36:1-43).  Rather  Isaac  is  to  be  the 
means  by  which  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  would  be  passed  on  to  its 
climactic fulfillment in the Lord Jesus Christ (Gal. 3:16). Yet not even all of 
the seed of Isaac are to be regarded as true children of Abraham. So what is 
                                              
23
 Phillip Mauro is mistaken in writing: “This Scripture [Romans 9:6-8] gives us, in  addition to the important 
truth that not all Israelites are included in the ‘Israel’ of God's prophetic purposes, the closely allied truth that 
‘the children of God,’ that is, those who are saved by the gospel, are "the children of the promise" (definite 
article in the original); and that they are ‘counted for the seed’ (of Abraham).” The Hope of Israel: What Is 
It? p. 204. Grover Gunn is likewise incorrect when he makes the same inclusive generalization: “The spiritual 
seed of Abraham are all those who truly share Abraham’s faith (Rom. 4:11-12), and these alone are the seed 
of Abraham in the most fundamental sense of the term (John 8:39; Rom. 9:6-7; 2:28. Only these will inherit 
the  promises  of  the  covenant  in  terms  of  real  spiritual  rest  and  an  eternal  inheritance.”  Dispensationalism, 
Today, Yesterday, And Tomorrow, p. 234. 
24
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 9. Walter Gutbrod similarly states: “[W]e are not told here that Gentile Christians are 
the  true  Israel.  The  distinction  at  Romans  9:6  does  not  go  beyond  what  is  presupposed  at  John  1:47 
[concerning pious Nathanael].” “ 'Isra¾l” Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, ed. Gerhard Kittel, 
III, p. 387.   
25
  Moo, Romans, p. 574. Also Fred Zaspel notes that the previously listed Jewish blessings are not expounded 
here  by  Paul  as  being  “now  realized  in  the  church;  .  .  .  they  belong  to  Israel;  .  .  .  they  have  not  become 
ineffectual  for  them;  they  offer  no  less  a  real  hope  today  than  ever.”  Jews,  Gentiles  and  the  Goal  of 
Redemptive History, pp. 12-13. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  277
it that distinguishes the lineage of the godly seed, that passes from Abraham 
to  Isaac  to  Jacob?  The  answer  is  in  the  fact  that  Abraham  was  “called” 
(Gen.  12:1;  15:7;  Acts  7:3;  Heb.  11:8),  and  became  a  child  of  “promise” 
(Gen.  12:2-3;  15:5-6;  Gal.  3:16-19;  Heb.  6:13-15),  even  as  did  Isaac  and 
Jacob.  Paul  will  make  further  explanation  concerning  this  point.  Suffice  to 
say here that for the Apostle, as we have already seen, “calling” (4:17; 8:28, 
30 and “promise” (1:1-2; 4:13-21), are wholly of elective, works excluding, 
sovereign grace.  
 
(1)  Isaac hoped in the promise, not the flesh, v. 8. 
  For all of his earthly blessings, yet Ishmael is designated as belonging to “the 
children of the flesh” (8:5) even as his life was void of the faith of his father. 
He was to be, “a wild donkey of a man, his hand will be against everyone, 
and  everyone’s  hand  will  be  against  him,  and  he  will  live  to  the  east  of  his 
brothers” (Gen. 16:12).  Thus his descendants became known as Arabians as 
well  as  the  troublesome  Edomites.    The  essential  distinguishing  feature 
between  the  half-brothers  was  “promise,”  which  in  Pauline  terms  means 
that Isaac was chosen, according to pure grace, to be an heir of the promise 
given to his father, in spite of Abraham’s initial preference for Ishmael (Gen. 
17:18-19).  Thus  those  children  of  Abraham  who  inherit  “the  promise”  are 
“regarded  [reckoned,  log…zomai,  logizomai,  cf.  4:3;  8:18,  36]  as  [true 
spiritual]  descendants,”  as  true  Israelites.  By  an  act  of  divine  will,  not 
intrinsic  human  merit,  the  promise  is  given  with  particularity,  such  as  to 
Isaac but not Ishmael.  
  Luther  comments:  “Therefore  it  inexorably  follows  that  the  flesh  does  not 
make sons of God and the heirs of promise, but only the gracious election of 
God.  .  .  .  Therefore,  why  does  man  take  pride  in  his  merits  and  works, 
which  in  no  way  are  pleasing  to  God?  For  they  are  good,  or  meritorious, 
works,  but  only  because  they  have  been  chosen  by  God  from  eternity  that 
they please Him.”
26
 
 
(2)  Isaac was born of Sarah, not Hagar, v. 9. 
  The  fact  of  Isaac  being  a  child  of  promise,  born  in  spite  of  all  natural 
expectations  to  Sarah,  is  proved  from  Genesis  18:10.  Here  also  is  implicit 
contrast  with  the  rejection  of  Ishmael,  the  child  of  Hagar  according  to 
human design (Gen. 16:1-4). Isaac is designated by divine sovereign will, not 
the  advice  of  Abraham  (Genesis  17:18-19),  to  be  the  true  spiritual 
descendant according to the promise, the Abrahamic Covenant. Sarah was a 
free  woman  who  gave  birth  “through  the  promise”  while  Hagar  was  an 
Egyptian maid who gave birth “according to the flesh” (Gal. 4:23). Thus, in 
spite  of  the  “Ishmaels”  and  carnal  seed  of  Abraham  throughout  Hebrew 
history, the promise originally given has not been invalidated, “the word of 
God  has  not  failed,”  v.  6a,  for  the  seed  of  Isaac  remains  even  to  this  day, 
and  shall  remain  because  “the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  irrevocable” 
                                              
26
  Martin Luther, Luther’sWorks, Lectures on Romans,25, p. 385. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  278
(11:29).  This  concern  then  for  “the  justification  of  God”  is  the  dominant 
matter that Paul is careful to maintain.
27
 
 
a.  Jacob as a distinctive child of Isaac, vs. 10-13. 
 
The  generation  succeeding  Isaac  provides  an  even  greater  representation  of  the 
sovereign  will  of  God  that  continues  to  work  within  the  seed  of  Abraham  in 
general.  Whereas  Isaac  and  Ishmael,  as  descendants  of  Abraham,  were  born 
separately  to  different  mothers  with  contrasting  status,  in  the  case  of  Jacob  and 
Esau, as descendants of Abraham, they were born as twins from the same mother. 
Consequently,  the  divine  purpose,  according  to  sovereign  calling  and  promise,  is 
alone  the  cause  of  the  constituency  of  the  true  spiritual  Israel,  not  the  external 
forms  and  especially  circumcision,  cf.  vs.  3-5,  though  for  the  Jewish  Christian 
they  may  have  significance.  This  principle  applies  to  the  constituency  of  the 
Christian  church,  even  though  the  ordinances  have  significant  legitimacy  (Eph. 
1:3-6).  
 
(1)  Jacob was born with his brother Esau, v. 10. 
 
While Isaac represented the distinction of promise as opposed to flesh within 
the general seed of Abraham, now we have the same distinction made within 
the  general  seed  of  Isaac.  This  distinction  within  the  ongoing  lineage  of  the 
children  of  God  only  reinforces  the  mystery  of  God’s  elective  purposes  that 
defy  human  contribution  and  allow  God  to  populate  heaven  as  He  sees  fit. 
Even  the  traditional  seniority,  which  would  normally  accrue  to  Esau  in  his 
coming  first  from  Rebekah’s  womb,  is  turned  on  its  head  (Gen.  25:21-34; 
27:1-38; 28:10-17; 32:24-32).  
 
(2)  Jacob was  chosen as distinct from Esau, v. 11. 
 
However,  the  distinction  that  God  makes  between  Jacob  and  Esau  must  be 
appreciated in the most absolute sense of excluding human cooperation, and 
that preceding their earthly struggles and conflicts that commenced as Jacob 
clung to Esau’s heel at their birth (Gen. 25:26). Prior to their birth they had 
not  “practiced  [pr£ssw,  prasso¯ ,  aorist,  as  active  habit,  cf.  2:3]  anything 
good  or  bad.”
28
  Hence,  God  had  a  particular  “elective  purpose  [cf.  8:28]”  
that  distinguished  between  the  two,  before  “they,”  obviously  “the  twins,” 
had  done,  through  personal  action,  “anything  good  or  bad  [foul].”  The 
divine  intent  here  was  that  God’s  individual  election  of  Jacob  be  upheld, 
human works be excluded, and His “[effectual] calling” be acknowledged in 
all of its humbling, pristine sovereignty!  
 
 
                                              
27
  It is fitting that Piper’s study of Romans 9 is titled, The Justification of God. 
28
  Shedd  comments:  “St.  Paul  does  not  exclude  sin  altogether,  so  as  to  imply  innocence,  because  one  of  these 
individuals  was  elected  to  salvation,  and  salvation  presupposes  sin  and  condemnation.”  Commentary  on 
Romans,  p.  284.  Of  course  the  Pelagian  would  claim  innocence  at  birth  with  sin  originating  from  personal 
choice. However 5:12, 19 declares that sin is inherited, and inheritance certainly precedes birth. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  279
(3)  Jacob was favored over Esau, vs. 12-13. 
 
Paul’s  argument  is  humbling  to  the  proud  human  condition,  that  boastful 
spirit of autonomy and self-determination, and especially the Jew who trusts 
in  physical lineage  with  Abraham. Challenge  can  be  expected.  Hence proof 
must be forthcoming from Scripture. Two quotations follow. 
 
(a)  In the area of employment, v. 12. 
 
  Genesis  25:23.  To  Rebekah  the  Lord  declared  that,  “the  older  [Esau] 
shall  serve  the  younger  [Jacob],”  though  this  subjection  is  not  evident 
during  their  lifetimes.  However,  as  Paul  writes  he  and  others  in  Rome 
would  be  aware  of  the  conflict  and  subjugation  of  Esau’s  seed,  the 
Edomites,  by  David,  Amaziah,  Uzziah,  and  finally  the  Maccabees.
29
 
Such a reversal of the custom of privileged inheritance for the firstborn 
is  solely  according  to  divine  prerogative.  Thus  promise  overrides  not 
only  a  patriarchal  norm,  but  preeminently  works,  also  faith,  and  even 
foreseen  merit  since  “doing  good  [following  birth]”  is  excluded,  v.  11. 
Therefore  this  calling  and  covenantal  promise,  rooted  in  Abraham,  is 
according to pure grace and mercy.  
 
(b)  In the area of esteem, v. 13.  
 
  Malachi  1:2-5.  The  prophet  writes,  “Jacob  I  loved  [aorist],  but  Esau  I 
hated [aorist],” suggesting prior determination. The Hebrew word here 
is  an}c*,  sane,  which  usually  means  “intense  detestation”  and 
“loathing,”  especially  with  regard  to  evil  (Ps.  97:10;  Prov.  6:16-19; 
Amos  5:15),  idolatry  (Jer.  44:3-4),  divorce  (Mal.  2:16),  even  hatred  of 
those  who  hate  God  (Ps.  139:21-22);  yet  there  is  a  weaker  sense  of 
“alienation”  which  the  synonymous  parallelism  of  Ezekiel  23:28 
indicates.
30
  So  here  as  well  there  are  distinct  reasons  for  the  idea  of 
“rejection”  or  “spurning”  rather  than  “hatred”  as  emotional  despite.
31
 
Of course this interpretation in no way detracts from the absolute and 
particular  choice  of  God.  In  the  same  vein  Calvin  declares  of  God  at 
this  point,  “I  have  chosen  him  [Jacob]  and  refused  this  [Esau].  .  .  .  I 
have rejected the Edomites, the progeny of Esau.”
32
  
  It  should  be  remembered  that  while  Esau  and  his  descendants  led 
profane  and  sinful  lives  (Gen.  26:34-35;  27:41;  Obad.  10-14),  and 
Jacob  lacked  integrity,  the  elective/reprobate  distinction  made  before 
                                              
29
  Ibid., p. 286.  
30
  Vine, Unger, White, Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words, p. 105. 
31
  So Cranfield and Moo. Haldane similarly remarks: “It is evident that the quotation from the Old Testament 
of these words, ‘Jacob have I  loved, but Esau have I hated,’ is here  made by the Apostle with the design of 
illustrating  the  great  truth  which  he  is  laboring  through  the  whole  of  this  chapter  to  substantiate;  namely, 
that in the rejection of the great body of the Jewish nation, as being ‘vessels of wrath,’ while He reserved for 
Himself a remnant among them as ‘vessels of mercy,’ verses 22-23, neither the purpose nor the promises of 
God had failed.” Romans, p. 469.   
32
  Calvin, Romans, p. 257. Likewise Edwards, Works, II, p. 852. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  280
their birth was not based upon intrinsic or prospective “good or bad.” 
Hence  the  “hatred”  or  “rejection”  here,  not  being  based  upon  moral 
focus,  means  that  the  choice  was  within  the  inscrutable,  sovereign 
counsel  of  God.  Of  course  this  thought  of  “rejection”  appears  here  to 
be more than “preterition,” or the mere passing by of Esau. There was 
both  a  choice  of  Jacob  in  grace,  and  the  abandonment  of  Esau  to 
reprobation.
33
  However,  the  main  point  is  that  it  was  wholly  God’s 
decision  and  as  such  exclusive  of  human  merit  or  contribution. 
Therefore,  the  covenant,  saving  plan  of  God  channeled  through 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  is  certain  to  be  accomplished;  thus  “the 
Word of God has not and will not fail”! 
  Hence,  God’s  love  for  Jacob  was  grace  in  election  and  promise,  and  it 
was  both  corporate  and  particular.  The  partial  quotation  of  Genesis 
25:23  in  v.  12  follows  the  Lord’s  statement  to  Rebekah  that,  “two 
nations  are  in  your  womb.”  The  broader  context  of  Malachi  1:1-5 
certainly  indicates  a  corporate  meaning  with  regard  to  not  only  Israel, 
but also God’s rejection of Esau who incorporates his descendants, the 
nation of Edom. Nevertheless the fact of  particular election/reprobation 
is in no way excluded here, as some would hope to accomplish.
34
 Surely 
corporate  election  is  but  the  outworking  of  particular  election,  even  as 
the corporate “remnant” (11:5) is comprised of individual, elect Jewish 
Christians.  Further,  the  following  reference  to  Pharaoh  (v.  17)  is  most 
particular. Moo responds with three main arguments for the primacy of 
individual election at this juncture that are summarized as follows. First, 
Paul  describes  Jacob  and  Esau  as  individuals  with  regard  to  their 
conception,  birth,  and  “works.”  Second,  Paul  uses  familiar, 
individualistic salvation words such as “election” and “calling” that are 
difficult  to  apply  to  a  nation.  Third,  to  assert  the  choice  of  Israel  over 
Edom does not fit with his former argument regarding a “physical” and 
“spiritual” discrimination being made within Israel.
35
  
 
2.  Distinguished as children through mercy, vs. 14-18. 
 
The objection of v. 6a has been answered. However, knowing human nature, especially 
the jealous claim of autonomy, of self-determination, of human initiative, Paul is quick 
to anticipate another major objection that challenges the justice of God concerning the 
aforementioned  election/reprobation  and  finds  expression  in  three  questions  (vs.  14, 
19).  First,  in  v.  14,  “Is  not  election/reprobation  in  conflict  with  human  moral 
accountability and thus an indictment of God’s justice?” In other words, how can man 
                                              
33
  This positive act of reprobation ought not to be pursued, especially by means of logical scrutiny, further than 
does  Scripture,  otherwise  we  may  find  our  finiteness  coming  to  a  precipice  that  leads  to  being  dashed  to 
pieces  by  wrong  conclusions.  Probably  the  intricacies  of  lapsarianism  fall  into  this  category.  Refer  to  L 
Berkhof, Systematic Theology, pp. 118-125.  
34
  This is probably the most popular attempt used by many to avoid any thought of particularism at this point, 
such as with R. Shank, Elect In The Son. Refer to Murray’s detailed response to this concept, Romans, II, pp. 
15-21.  
35
  Moo, Romans, p. 585. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  281
be  judged  by  God  for  his  moral  stance  before  God  if  it  has  been  predetermined  by 
God’s arbitrary decree?   
 
a.  The principle of God’s justice upheld, v. 14. 
 
Paul’s rhetorical question (cf. 3:5; 6:1; 7:7) is surely drawn from past experience, 
even  as  the  doctrine  of  God’s  absolute  sovereignty  has  never  ceased  to  stimulate 
the defensive human reaction of “Yes God is sovereign, but man is not a robot,” 
or “man has free-will.” The question, “There is no injustice with God, is there?” 
expects  a  negative  answer,  along  with  the  emphatic,  “May  it  never  be!”  In  the 
light of v. 6a, the Apostle’s emphatic denial here cannot be overstated, especially 
as  the  term  “injustice,”  ¢dik…a,  adikia,  is  literally  translated  in  the  KJV  as 
“unrighteousness.” To charge God with a crime is a very serious matter indeed; it 
has an unholy audaciousness, an impudence about it which is hardly fitting for the 
finite  creature  to  bring  as  a  charge  against  the  infinite  God.  But  man  in  sin  has 
never lacked insolence before the Almighty! 
 
b.  The principle of election through mercy upheld, vs. 15-16.   
 
It  is  significant  that  as  Paul  raises  a  contentious  issue,  even  as  Romans  9  is 
probably the most contentious chapter in all of Romans, in response he provides 
more separate Scripture quotations, eleven in all,  to uphold his overall case, than 
in  any  other  comparable  section  in  this  Epistle.  The  Apostle  appears  to  logically 
deal  with  the  ramifications  of  God’s  election  of  Jacob  first  with  reference  to 
Moses, vs. 15-16, then the reprobation of Esau second with reference to Pharaoh, 
vs. 17-18.  
 
(1)  This sovereign mercy is according to Scripture, v. 15. 
 
Here the quotation of Exodus 33:19 is based upon Moses’ ongoing desire for 
the  saving,  reassuring  presence  of  the  LORD  so  that,  “I  and  Your  people 
[already  backslidden,  cf.  ch.  32]  be  distinguished  from  all  the  other  people 
who are upon the face of the earth,” v. 16. So the LORD favorably responds 
declaring that Moses, as Israel’s representative, will witness the glory of His 
name, signifying that, “I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious [Israel], 
and will show compassion to whom I will show compassion,” in spite of the 
Golden Calf incident. Here the covenant given to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob 
was  maintained,  in  spite  of  offending  sin,  solely  on  account  of  sovereign 
“mercy” and “compassion.” Both terms are distinguishable as relieving love 
and  pitiable  love,  yet  the  parallelism  here  simply  suggests  “grace”  (11:5-6). 
Hence,  the  election  of  Jacob  according  to  v.  13  was  based  solely  upon  the 
same  divine  prerogative  described  here.    The  parable  of  the  Laborers  in  the 
Vineyard (Matt. 20:1-16) is illustrative of the selective mercy described here, 
when Christ declares, “Is it not lawful for me to do what I wish with what is 
my own?” v. 15. Thus Stephen Charnock declares: 
The apostle joins mercy and this sovereignty of his will together (Rom. 9:15), . 
. . He is so absolute a sovereign that he will give no account of these matters 
but  his  own  good  pleasure.  Why  he  renews  man  is  merely  voluntary;  why  he 
saves renewed man is just; why he justifies those that believe is justice to Christ 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  282
and  mercy  to  them;  but  why  he  bestows  faith  on  any  is  merely  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  will.  .  . .  [O]ur  Savior himself  renders  this  only as  a  reason of 
his  distinguishing  mercy,  wherein  himself  doth,  and  therefore  we  must, 
acquiesce (Matt. 11:27), ‘Even so, Father, for so it pleased thee.’
36
 
 
(2)  This sovereign mercy is exclusive of human capacity, v. 16. 
 
From the divine declaration there is derived the divine principle. “Therefore, 
it surely follows that [it is] not of the one willing or the one who is running, 
but  of  the  God  of  Abraham  showing  mercy.”  However,  the  implied  subject 
“it”  must  first  be  identified,  and  the  preceding  context  suggests  God’s 
“mercy”  and  “compassion,”  directed  toward  the  seed  of  promise  flowing 
from  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  In  more  simple  and  timeless  terms,  the 
contrast  is made  between  man and  God. In  more broad  terms,  with man  in 
his  unholy  predicament  on  earth  and  God  in  his  holy  glory  in  heaven,  the 
question arises as to how man may be reconciled with the offended God.  
One  alternative  is  for  man  to  attempt  “willing”  and  “running,”  the  present 
tenses  reflecting  persistent  effort;  here  he  offers  self-determination  and  self-
exertion,  and  both  are  excluded,  though  not  absolutely.  For  as  Luther 
comments: 
This  is  not  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  that  this  is  a  matter  only  of  God’s 
showing mercy, as if it were not necessary for a person to will or exert himself, 
but  rather  the  fact  that  a  man  does  will  or  exert  himself  is  not  of  his  own 
power  but  of  the  mercy  of  God,  who  has  given  this  power  of  willing  and 
doing, without which man of himself can neither will or make exertion.
37
  
Thus  faith  is  not  excluded  here,  except  it  be  regarded  as  a  work  of 
autonomous  man,  as  the  free-will  response  of  man,  even  as  vs.  30-33 
indicate. However, in contemporary evangelicalism there is much evangelism 
that  is  a  vain  display  of  “willing”  and  “running,”  of  decisionism, 
rationalism, ritualism, abstract believism, etc.   
The  other  alternative  is  with  regard  to  God  “who  has  mercy.”  Here  this 
mercy  is  not  simply  on  offer,  but  active  in  a  most  particular  and  effectual 
sense. In other words, “Salvation is from the Lord” (Jonah 2:9), and the self-
renouncing,  works-renouncing  faith  that  truly  lays  hold  of  this  gospel 
principle is that which wholly trusts in the mercy of God. Indeed such faith 
may well not be too much aware of the profound distinctions being made by 
Paul at this point concerning election and reprobation. Luther warns against 
the  unconverted  becoming  engrossed  in  such  matters,
38
  as  does  J.  C.  Ryle.
39
 
                                              
36
  Stephen Charnock, Works, III, p. 268. 
37
  Luther, Works, 25, p. 388. 
38
  “I am issuing the warning that no man whose mind has not been purged should rush into these speculations, 
lest  he  fall  into  the  abyss  of  horror  and  hopelessness;  but  first  let  him  purge  the  eyes  of  his  heart  in  his 
meditations on the wounds of Jesus Christ. For I myself would not even read these things if the order of the 
lection and necessity did not compel me to do so. For this is very strong wine and the most complete meal, 
solid food for those who are perfect, that is, the most excellent theology, of which the apostle says: ‘Among 
the mature we do impart wisdom’ (I Cor. 2:6). But I am a baby who needs milk, not solid food (cf. I Cor. 3:1-
2).  Let  him  who  is  a  child  like  me  do  the  same.  The  wounds  of  Jesus  Christ,  ‘the  clefts  of  the  rock,’  are 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  283
But  simply  mention  the  rich  and  free  mercy  of  God  to  such  a  newly  saved 
sinner  and  he  will  affirm  it  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm.  Then  follows 
enlarged understanding. 
      I sought the Lord and afterward I knew 
      He moved my soul to seek Him, seeking me; 
      It was not I that found, O Savior true; 
      No, I was found of Thee.    
 
c.  The principle of reprobation through hardening, vs. 17-18. 
 
Here  the  antithesis  of  sovereign  “mercy”,  as  reflected  in  God’s  love  of  Jacob,  is 
declared  to  be  sovereign  “hardening”  as  reflected  in  God’s  rejection,  even 
reprobation of Esau. The  sober nature of this aspect of God’s dealings with fallen 
man is reflected in Calvin’s notable comment that, “[t]he decree [of reprobation] 
is dreadful indeed [decretum horribile], I confess.”
40
   
 
(1)  This sovereign hardening is according to Scripture, v. 17. 
 
  The  specific  reference  here  is  to  Exodus  9:16,  where,  following  the  fifth 
plague of cattle disease, the sixth plague of boils has struck Pharaoh and all 
the Egyptians. In vs. 14 God declares that the plagues have been designed so 
that, “you [Pharaoh] may know that there is no one like Me in all the earth.”  
He  could  have  rightly  judged  and  crushed  Pharaoh  in  an  instant,  v.  15; 
however,  “I  have  allowed  you  to  remain,  in  order  to  show  you  My  power 
and  in  order  to  proclaim  My  name  through  all  the  earth,”  v.  16,  cf.  10:1. 
Hence,  God’s  intention  is  that  by  means  of  his  saving  and  judging  power 
manifest toward Israel and Egypt, Jacob and Esau, His unique glory might be 
displayed.  Thus  the  God  who  has  decisively  spoken  and  given  mercy  to 
Moses, v. 15, is the same God who has decisively spoken and given hardness 
to  Pharaoh,  v.  17,  all  according  to  His  just  and  inscrutable  will.  Haldane 
declares  that,  “the  birth,  the  life,  and  the  situation  of  Pharaoh  were  all  of 
Divine appointment.”
41
 
 Pharaoh  was  particularly  “raised  up”  in  no  different  sense  than  were  Judas 
(John 6:70), and “Herod and Pontius Pilate, along with the Gentiles and the 
peoples  of  Israel,  to  do  whatever  Your  [God’s]  hand  and  Your  purpose 
predestined  to  occur”  (Acts  4:27-28;  cf.  2:23).  Yet  none  of  these  who  were 
reprobate  would  have  claimed  to  be  under  divine  duress.  Herein  lies  the 
                                                                                                                                                          
sufficiently  safe  for  us.  The  strong  and  the  perfect  may  discuss  the  first  book  of  the  Sentences  [a  theology 
volume  by  Peter  Lombard  dealing  with  predestination,  etc.],  which  properly  should  not  be  the  first  but  the 
last  book.  Many  today  rush  into  this  book  heedlessly  and  strangely  also  become  blinded.”  Comment  on 
Romans 9:16, Works, 25, pp. 389-90. 
39
  “A  man  must  first  go  to  the  little  Grammar-school  of  Repentance  and  Faith,  before  he  enters  the  great 
University of Election and Predestination.” Old Paths, p. 473. 
40
  John Calvin, Institutes of Christian Religion, III, 23, 7. 
41
  Haldane, Romans, p. 479. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  284
transcendent  truth  of  antinomy,
42
  the  particularity  of  God’s  dealings  with 
man,  even  as  the  potter  forms  the  clay  according  to  his  design,  vs.  20-21. 
God is totally sovereign over man who is at the same time fully responsible 
for  his  actions  under  this  sovereignty.  As  Loraine  Boettner  has  written: 
“Predestination  and  free  agency  [thus  accountability]  are  twin  pillars  of  a 
great temple, and they meet above the clouds where the human gaze cannot 
penetrate.”
43
  Hence,  humble  caution  is  required  here.  Haldane  warns  that 
while  the  “truth  respecting  Pharaoh  is  what  the  Scriptures  declare;  .  .  .  we 
ought never to pretend to go further into the deep things of God than they go 
before us, but submissively to bow to every Divine declaration.”
44
  
 
(2)  This sovereign hardening is exclusive of demerit, v. 18. 
 
Again,  from  the  divine  declaration  there  is  derived  the  divine  principle. 
“Therefore it follows that He, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, shows 
mercy  [present  tense]  to  whoever  He  desires,  and  likewise  He  hardens 
[present  tense]  whoever  He  desires.”  For  Paul  this  hardening,  sklhrÚnw,  
skle¯ runo¯ , appears to be an ongoing process, rather than a past appointment, 
that  is  associated  with  “vessels  of  wrath  prepared  for  destruction,”  v.  22. 
Such  a  process  is  consistent  with  the  repeated  description  of  this  hardening 
action  by  God  (9:12;  10:1,  20,  27;  11:10;  14:8),  so  that  Pharaoh’s  heart 
becomes  increasingly  unyielding.  However,  as  Edwards  well  points  out,  the 
method of God’s hardening activity here is not to be construed as direct so as 
to  make  God  the  indictable  author  of  sin.  Rather,  God  introduces 
circumstances  that  will  aggravate  Pharaoh’s  recalcitrant  heart.
45
  These 
circumstances  are  God’s  irritant  that,  like  the  law  (7:7-13),  aggravate  the 
sinner  to  the  point  where,  without  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  the  soul  is 
increasingly  hardened.  However,  Boice  rightly  warns  us:  “God’s  raising 
Pharaoh to this position [of dominion] does not mean that he made him sin. 
Pharaoh  sinned  because  he  chose  to  sin,  and  he  resisted  God  and  hardened 
                                              
42
  By “antinomy” is not meant “contradiction” or “paradox,” but the fact of two undoubted truths that, while 
appearing to be in conflict, yet are both acknowledged to be true in spite of man’s inability to comprehend 
reconciliation. Consider the question of whether light is wave and/or particle.     
43
  Loraine Boettner, The Reformed Doctrine of Predestination, p. 222. 
44
  Haldane, Romans, p. 479. 
45
  “When God is here spoken of as hardening some of the children of men, it is not to be understood that God 
by  any  positive  efficiency  hardens  any man’s  heart. There  is  no  positive  act  in  God,  as  though  he  put  forth 
any power to harden the heart. To suppose any such thing would be to make God the immediate author of 
sin.  God  is  said  to  harden  men  in  two  ways:  by  withholding  the  powerful  influences  of  his  Spirit,  without 
which  their  hearts  will  remain  hardened,  and grow harder  and  harder;  in  this  sense  he  hardens  them,  as he 
leaves them to hardness. And again, by ordering those things in his providence which, through the abuse of 
their  corruption,  become  the  occasion of  their  hardening.  Thus  God  sends  his word and  ordinances  to  men 
which,  by  their  abuse,  prove  an  occasion  of  their  hardening.  So  the  apostle  said,  that  he  was  unto  some  ‘a 
savor of death unto death’ [II Cor. 2:15-16]. So God is represented as sending Isaiah on this errand, to make 
the  hearts  of  the  people  fat,  and  to  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  to  shut  their  eyes;  lest  they  should  see  with 
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed’ (Isa. 6:10). 
Isaiah’s preaching was, in itself, of a contrary tendency, to make them better. But their abuse of it rendered it 
an occasion of their hardening. As God is here said to harden men, so he is said to put a lying spirit in the 
mouth of the false prophets (II Chron. 18:22). That is, he suffered a lying spirit to enter into them.” Jonathan 
Edwards, Works, II, p. 849. Similarly Shedd, Romans, pp. 291-3. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  285
his heart because it is the nature of sin to harden hearts.”
46
  Even so, it is the 
supremacy  of  the  divine  will  dominant  in  this  verse  that,  like  v.  16,  is  the 
humbling principle with regard to  the constituency of the true and spiritual 
seed of Abraham.  
Some have suggested that God hardens the heart of Pharaoh, to begin with in 
9:12,  only  after  Pharaoh  himself  first  hardened  his  own  heart  in  8:15,  32.
47
 
However, this overlooks the prophecy of 4:21; 7:3 and, as Moo points out, 
the  lack  of  such  an  explanation  in  response  to  the  objection  of  v.  19.
48
 
According to the process Edwards annunciates, God may justly harden, any 
sinner that He chooses. 
 
3.  Distinguished as children through sovereignty, vs. 19-29.  
 
Surely  Paul  responds  here  just  as  he  has  on  countless  occasions  in  witnessing  to  Jews 
who  have  wrestled  with  the  question  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  human 
responsibility.  Conservative  “Pharisees  held  that  all  was  not  predestined  and  that 
though  divine  providence  governed  all  things,  man  still  had  freedom  of  choice.  .  .  . 
[Liberal]  Saducees  denied  predestination  and  any  [specific]  divine  influence  on  men’s 
doings,  good  or  bad.”
  49
  Hence  the  preceding  instruction  would  be  regarded  as 
“predestinarian,” to use Jewish terminology, and definitely unorthodox.  
 
a.  Man’s objection to sovereign mercy/reprobation, v. 19. 
 
The  essential  complaint  is  that  God  appears  to  be  unfair  if  He  determines 
individual  human  destiny  while  at  the  same  time  holding  the  individual  to  be 
accountable  for  his  belief  or  unbelief.  How  can  God  judge  or  “find  fault”  with 
faithless  Esau  and  Pharaoh  if  He  also  determined  the  bent  of  their  choosing? 
Surely  they  were  unable  to  “resist  His  will”!  While  a  polarized  situation  is 
envisaged here with regard to the relationship between man and God, it is obvious 
that  the  objector,  representative  of  the  natural  man,  is  far  more  concerned  with 
the cause of man than of God. 
 
b.  God’s vindication of sovereign mercy/reprobation, v. 20-29. 
 
Paul’s  response  commences  with  a  more  jealous  regard  for  God  rather  than  for 
man,  even  as  this  priority  is  always  an  indication  of  true  Christian  conversion 
(Gal.  4:9).  Yet  he  weaves  his  fervent  response  in  such  a  way  that  we  are  soon 
returned to the sovereignty of God’s calling of not only the righteous remnant at 
the present within national Israel, but also the Gentiles. 
 
                                              
46
  James Montgomery Boice, Romans, III, pp. 1094-5. 
47
  So  Lenski,  Morris,  Stott.  C.  H.  Dodd,  representative  of  liberal  opinion  which  tends  to  impose  a  human 
perspective, comments that here Paul’s “thought declines from its highest level. . . . He pushes what we must 
describe as an unethical determinism.” Romans, p. 158. 
48
  Moo, Romans, pp. 598-9. 
49
  Abraham  Weinfeld,  Basic  Jewish  Ethics  and  Freedom  of  Will,  p.  7.  Josephus  makes  the  same  assessment, 
though he adds that the Essenes were strict predestinarians. Antiquities, XIII, V, 9. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  286
(1)  He has full rights over the creature, vs. 20-21. 
 
  Does  man have  the “right”,  assumed  to be  allowed  by  God,  to question  the 
purposes of God? Does the creature have the “right” to question the ways of 
the  Creator?  Of  course  the  answer  here  can  only  be  determined  when  the 
origin  of  these  “rights”  is  discovered.  Surely  God  alone  establishes  the 
“right,” not man. Sinful, rebellious man may claim “rights,” while they may 
not have connection with the “righteousness of God.” So here, Paul responds 
to  an  objection  that  suggests  necessary  “rights,”  especially  autonomy,  that 
are in fact “wrongs” that emanate from the aspirations of fallen man.  
  C. H. Dodd makes pompous and consistently liberal comments at this point, 
not unlike the objector that Paul responds to: 
  Has  the  potter  no  right  over  the  clay?  It  is  a  well-worn  illustration.  But  the 
trouble  is  that  a  man  is  not  a  pot;  he  will  ask,  ‘Why  did  you  make  me  like 
this?’ and he will not be bludgeoned into silence. It is the weakest point in the 
whole epistle. . . . [Paul] has just represented [God] as a non-moral despot. . . . 
[W]hen Paul, normally a clear thinker, becomes obscure, it usually means that 
he is embarrassed by the position he has taken up
50
 
  We will respond to this as the argument further unfolds. 
 
(a)  Who is man that he questions God’s design?, v. 20a. 
 
Paul  does  not  give  a  direct  reply  to  v.  19  since  the  question  is  born  of 
proud  impertinence.  God  is  not  answerable  to  man,  though  man  is 
answerable to God even as Job discovered (Job 38:1-40:2); yet without 
an  explanation  for  his  troubles  he  was  humbled  to  the  point  where  he 
confessed: “I am insignificant; what can I reply to You? I lay my hand 
on my mouth” (Job 40:4-5). Again, without an explanation concerning 
Job’s  troubles,  yet  submission  to,  rather  than  understanding  of,  the 
sovereignty  of  God  resulted  in  rest  and  greater  blessing.  So  Jonathan 
Edwards writes:  
Let us, therefore, labor to submit to the sovereignty of God. God insists, 
that  his  sovereignty  be  acknowledged  by  us,  and  that  even  in  this  great 
matter  which  so  nearly  and  infinitely  concerns  us,  as  our  own  eternal 
salvation.  This  is  the  stumbling-block  on  which  thousands  fall  and 
perish;  and  if  we  go  on  contending  with  God  about  his  sovereignty  [as 
Paul’s objector and Dodd do], it will be our eternal ruin. It is absolutely 
necessary that we should  submit to  God, as our absolute sovereign, and 
the  sovereign  over  our  souls;  as  one  who  may  have  mercy  on  whom  he 
will have mercy, and harden whom he will.
51
  
Certainly  vs.  22-23  further  expand  upon  the  purpose  of  God  rejecting 
Esau/Pharaoh  and  loving  Jacob/Moses;  but  Paul  regards  it  as 
unnecessary  that  he  reply  to  the  charge  of  divine  injustice.
52
  As  Morris 
                                              
50
  Dodd, Romans, p. 159. 
51
  Edwards, Works, II, p. 854. 
52
  Moo comments: “Paul never offers here–or anywhere else–a ‘logical’ solution to the tension between divine 
sovereignty and human responsibility that he creates. . . . Paul is content to hold the truths of God’s absolute 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  287
adds: “Paul is not saying there is no answer to the question; he is saying 
that the question is illegitimate.”
53
 Again, the infinite God does not have 
to explain everything to finite man; on the other hand, finite man ought 
to acknowledge his finiteness and submit (Deut. 29:29). 
(b)  Does the molder have to answer to the thing molded? v. 20b. 
 
The illustration concerning clay manufacture might be freely translated 
here: “Shall the plastic and formable substance [pl£sma, plasma] say to 
the  plastic  fabricator  and  substance  former  [pl£ssw,  plasso¯ ,  cf.  LXX 
Gen. 2:7; I Tim. 2:13], ‘Why did you make or fabricate me according to 
this  particular  design?’”  Paul  draws  upon  Isaiah  29:16;  45:9,  which 
indicate that the divine Potter in question does not act capriciously, but 
always  righteously.  However,  this  does  not  deny  Him  the  right  to 
fashion both premium items for “honorable use” and standard items for 
“common use, v. 21.  
 
(c)  Does the potter have to answer to the clay? v. 21. 
 
The same basic illustration draws upon familiar Old Testament imagery 
(Isa.  29:15-16;  45:9;  64:8-9;  Jer.  18:1-10),  and  probably  from  the 
Apocrypha  (Wisd.  15:7).
54
  Further,  from  v.  20  where  pl£ssw,  plasso¯ , 
means  to  form  or  manufacture  with  existing  substance  or  clay,  not  to 
create, so here the potter takes a common lump of preexisting clay, such 
as  from  the  womb  of  Rebecca  by  “one  man,  our  father  Isaac”  v.  10, 
and  makes  “one  vessel  for  honorable  use  and  another  for  common 
[dishonorable]  use”  (cf.  II  Tim.  2:20).  Paul  is  not  saying  that  God 
creates  men  as  sinners,  but  rather  that  he  takes  the  common  lump  of 
sinners  and  deals  with  them  individually,  not  merely  as  a  sinful  nation 
as  the  context  of  Isaiah  29:15-16;  45:9;  64:8-9;  Jer.  18:1-10,  suggests, 
according  to  His  purposes  of  election  and  reprobation.  So  Hodge 
comments: “It is not the right of God to create sinful beings in order to 
punish  them,  but  his  right  to  deal  with  sinful  beings  according  to  his 
good pleasure. . . . He pardons or punishes as he sees fit.”
55
 
                                                                                                                                                          
sovereignty–in both election and in hardening–and of full responsibility without reconciling them We would 
do well to emulate his approach.” Romans, p. 601. 
53
  Morris, Romans, p. 364. 
54
  “For when a potter kneads the soft earth and laboriously molds each vessel for our service, he fashions out of 
the same clay both the vessels that serve clean uses and those for contrary uses, making all in like manner; but 
which  shall  be  the  use  of  each  of  these  the  worker  in  clay  decides.”  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  15:7.  Refer  to 
Piper’s study of this passage, Justification of God, pp. 195-6. 
55
  Charles  Hodge,  Romans,  p.  319.  So  Boice,  Haldane,  Murray,  Piper,  Shedd.  Luther  quotes  Augustine:  “For 
grace alone distinguishes the redeemed from the condemned, all having been mingled in one mass of perdition 
by the common cause of their common origin.” Works, 25, pp. 388-9. Logic may lead to a conclusion that 
God has predestined and created sinners. However, such a logical conclusion also leads to the indictment of 
God as being complicit in sinful origination. Such an inference has a very obnoxious and unholy ring about 
it. Further, Scripture nowhere explicitly declares God to be the creator of sinners; the wicked angels and man 
are solely represented as being responsible  for their sin. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  288
With  regard  to  Dodd  at  this  point,  his  protest  that  in  relation  to  the 
Potter, “man is nor a pot,” has the inference that “man is more than a 
pot, man is something, man was made in the image of God.” But Paul 
here  is  not  dealing  with  relative  status,  rather  origination.  So  that 
whether  we  consider  a  pot,  a  petunia,  a  pussycat,  or  a  person,  all  are 
creatures  and  all  equally  have  their  existence  at  God’s  sole  discretion. 
Dodd’s protest is tinged with the arrogance of vaunted autonomy. This 
is  further  indicated  when  he  writes  that  man,  “will  ask,  ‘Why  did  you 
make me like this?” On the contrary, man in innocence would not have 
so complained. Sinful man certainly would have done so. On the other 
hand  authentic  Christians  are  to  “entrust  their  souls  to  a  faithful 
Creator in doing what is right” (I Pet. 4:19). 
 
(2)  He has full rights in showing mercy/reprobation, vs. 22-29. 
 
Paul’s rhetorical method often includes the rejoinder of a series of questions 
concerning  which  he  does  not  give  direct  explanation  since,  by  their  very 
nature the answers are all too obvious. This was God’s way of dealing with 
Job  (Job  38-39),  even  as  Paul  uses  the  same  method  in  2:21-23;  3:5-8; 
11:33-35;  Gal.  3:1-5,  and  here.    While  God  is  not  obliged  to  answer  the 
implied  charge  of  injustice  in  v.  19,  Paul  is  anxious  to  reveal  a  divine 
purpose  in  God’s  dealings  with  men  that  the  objector  has  not  considered, 
but ought to understand. The Potter’s ways are not capricious, but glorious 
in their outworking, even as they incorporate both Jew and Gentile; it is the 
perspective of the Potter that Paul is anxious to uphold. 
 
(a)  Enduring vessels prepared for ruin, v. 22. 
 
  “Suppose,” says Paul indicating reality rather theory, “that God, while 
being  immediately  desirous  to  bring  his  wrath  and  power  upon  vessels 
prepared  for  destruction,
56
  after  the  manner  of  Pharaoh’s  heart  being 
hardened, yet had good reason to be exceedingly patient for a time [cf. 
2:4]  so  as  to  delay  his  judgment?  Have  you  thought  of  such  a 
possibility? because it is in fact the case!” So Hodge expounds: 
  The  preparation  intended  is  that  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh.  God 
did not make him wicked and obdurate; but as a punishment for his sin, 
he so dealt with him that the evil of his nature revealed itself in a form, 
and  under  circumstances,  which  made  him  a  fit  object  of  the  punitive 
[hardening?] justice of God. The dealings of God as a sovereign are often, 
by the Jewish writers, spoken of in the same terms as those here used.”
57
  
 
                                              
56
  Haldane  comments  that,  “they  are  vessels  of  wrath,  and  by  their  sins  they  are  fitted  for  destruction.” 
Romans,  p.  493;  likewise  Stott.  However,  while  the  agent  of  this  “preparation  for  destruction”  is  not 
explicitly stated, the most likely identification is God, after the manner of the potter who makes some vessels 
for  “common  [dishonorable]”  use,  v.  21.  Literally,  these  vessels,  “having  been  prepared  [perfect  passive 
participle of katart…zw, katartizo¯ , not aorist] for destruction,” are involved in a hardening process, cf. vs. 18-
19,  as  1:24,  26,  28  reflect,  that  comes  to  a  climax  of  judgment  (Phil.  1:28;  3:18-19).  Refer  to  Cranfield, 
Romans, II, pp. 495-6.     
57
  Hodge, Romans, pp. 321-2. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  289
(b)  Honoring vessels prepared for glory, v. 23. 
 
The supposition of v. 22 is now asserted as truth, except that the focus 
now  turns  to  the  reason  for  the  divine  forbearance.  God  purposely 
delayed  judgment  so  that  the  “vessels  of  mercy  .  .  .  prepared 
beforehand
58
  for  glory,”  might  display  the  “riches  of  His  glory.”  This 
delay was when God “overlooked the times of ignorance” (Acts 17:30), 
when  “in  the  forbearance  of  God  He  passed  over  the  sins  previously 
committed”  (Rom.  3:25).  This  temporary  tolerance  was  exemplified  in 
God’s  dealing  with  Pharaoh.  The  major  divine  intent  is  the 
proclamation of the radiant glory of God’s sovereign grace by means of 
redemptive  glory  being  given  to  particular,  chosen  vessels,  in  “the 
fullness of time” (Gal. 4:4). This was the result of God’s patience with 
Pharaoh that ended with the display of God’s glory through the glorious 
redemption  of  Israel  from  Egypt.  This  contrast  in  God’s  dealing  with 
both the reprobate and elect only heightens the glory of God’s ways. As 
Piper  comments:  “It  behooves  every  great  artist  to  demonstrate  in  the 
variety  of  his  work  the  full  range  of  his  skill  and  power.”
59
  Thus  these 
“honorable  vessels”  reflect  or  refund  glory  back  to  its  source.  Such 
recipients  were  “chosen  in  Him  [Christ]  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world”  (Eph1:4;  cf.  Rom.  8:29-30).  So,  “He  [God  the  Father] 
predestined  us  to  adoption  as  sons  through  Jesus  Christ  to  Himself, 
according to the kind intention of His will, to the praise of the glory of 
His grace, which He freely bestowed on us in the Beloved” (Eph. 1:5-6). 
Thus Isaac Watts sums up this whole truth: 
       What if, to make his terrors known, 
          He lets his patience long endure, 
       Suff’ring vile rebels to go on, 
          And seal their own destruction sure? 
       What if He means to show his grace, 
          And his electing love employs 
       To mark out some of mortal race, 
          And form them fit for heav’nly joys? 
       But, O my soul! If truths so bright 
          Should dazzle and confound thy sight, 
       Yet still his written will obey, 
          And wait the great decisive day. 
 
(c)  Calling vessels as a holy remnant, v. 24-29. 
 
However  the  expression  “vessels  of  mercy”  in  v.  23  requires 
qualification.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the  church  at  Rome  is  probably 
                                              
58
  In contrast with the perfect tense used to describe the vessels of wrath “having been prepared” for destruction 
in  v.  22,  here  the  aorist  is  used  to  describe  the  vessels  of  mercy  “prepared  beforehand”  for  glory.  Here  we 
also  have  the  use  of  proetoim£zw,  proetoimazo¯   that  has  more  the  idea  of  preordination,  rather  than 
katart…zw, katartizo¯ , in v. 22. Cranfield emphasizes this distinction, Romans, II, p. 497. 
59
  Piper, Justification of God, p. 187. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  290
comprised of more Gentiles than Jews, an explanation is warranted here 
since  the  preceding  focus  could  easily  be  misunderstood,  as  if  the  elect 
was  solely  comprised  of  the  Jewish  remnant  enumerated  in  9:6-13. 
While  such  a  conclusion  ought  to  be  easily  dismissed  in  the  light  of 
Paul’s  ministry,  yet  a  biblical  explanation  is  called  for,  and  is  now 
forthcoming. His earlier canvas becomes refined and inclusive of greater 
detail, specifically the additional incorporation, equally effectual, of the 
Gentiles  within  God’s  “vessels  of  mercy,”  and  thus  to  prove  that,  “in 
you [Abraham] all the families of the earth will be blessed” (Gen. 12:3; 
Gal.  3:6-9).  The  “us”  then    of  v.  24  is  inclusive  of  all  the  saints  at 
Rome,  yet  as  they  are  distinguished  as  “called  Gentiles”  and  “called 
Jews.” 
 
1)  A Gentile remnant according to Hosea, vs. 24-26. 
 
  Hosea  was  a  prophet  to  the  ten  apostate  northern  tribes 
distinguished,  from  the  southern  kingdom  of  Judah,  as  the 
kingdom of Israel. His ministry was during the last 25 years of that 
decaying nation, prior to Assyrian exile in 722 BC. 
 
a)  God’s distinguishing mercy, v. 24. 
 
Notice that not all Jews or Gentiles are “called.” Paul reverts 
to  a  favorite  grace  term,  that  is sovereign “calling,”  cf.  8:28, 
30;  9:11,  so  that  we  are  reminded  once  again  of  God’s 
selective  dealings  in  pure  mercy,  though  now  with  broader 
focus on the nations of the world. 
 
b)  God’s distinguishing calling of Gentiles (Hos. 2:23b), v. 25. 
 
This  free  quotation  from  the  LXX,  similar  to  the  usage  of 
Peter (I Pet. 2:10), refers to Israel as “not being God’s people” 
on account of spiritual and material adultery. Yet through the 
sheer mercy of God, He “will call them My people.” Further, 
“I  will  have  compassion  on  her  who  had  not  obtained 
compassion”  (Hos.  2:23a).  But  could  not  Paul  have  chosen 
more  explicit  proof  of  the  inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  into  the 
people  of  God?  (Ps.  22:27;  86:9;  Isa.  42:6;  49:6;  56:6-7;  Jer. 
3:17;  Mic.  4:1-2;  Zech.  2:11).  Probably  the  language  of 
contrast is helpful to Paul’s argument. However Keil explains 
that this is not mere application: “Through its apostasy from 
God, Israel had become like the Gentiles, and had fallen from 
the  covenant  of  grace  with  the  Lord.  Consequently,  the  re-
adoption  of  the  Israelites  as  children  of  God  was  a  practical 
proof  that  God  had  also  adopted  the  Gentile  world  as  His 
children.”
60
  
                                              
60
  Keil, The Minor Prophets, pp. 49-50. Also Hodge, Shedd: “[A]s they [the tribes of Israel] had been excluded 
from  the  theocracy,  and  so  were  virtually  heathen,  the  apostle  regards  them  as  the  type  of  the  Gentiles 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  291
c)  God’s distinguishing calling of Gentiles (Hos. 1:10), v. 26. 
 
In  full  from  Hosea  this  quotation  reads:  “Yet  the  number  of 
the  sons  of  Israel  will  be  like  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which 
cannot  be  measured  and  numbered;  and  in  the  place  [of 
exile?]  where  it  is  said  to  them,  ‘You  are  not  My  people,’  it 
will  be  said  to  them,  “You  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God.” 
Paul  renders  the  last  statement,  “There  they  shall  be  called 
sons  of  the  living  God.”  This  is  the  main  point,  namely  that 
the  Gentiles  shall  be  engrafted  into  the  people  of  God 
according to purest sovereign mercy (11:17).  
 
2)  A Jewish remnant according to Isaiah, vs. 27-29. 
 
Isaiah  was  a  prophet,  contemporary  with  Hosea,  who  ministered 
during  c.  740-690  B.C.  to  the  two  southern  tribes  known  as  the 
kingdom  of  Judah.  Both  quotations  concern  apostasy  that 
preceded  the  Babylonian  captivity  which  was  followed  by  the 
return of a remnant to Jerusalem under Ezra and Nehemiah. Paul’s 
immediate concern is with regard to the present state of the nation 
of Israel, that is its pervasive unbelief that is yet not total.    
 
a)  God’s distinguishing call of Jews ( Isa. 10:22-3), vs. 27-28. 
 
  Isaiah’s  impassioned  “cry”  is  onomatopoeic,  kr£zw,  krazo¯ , 
being  an  intense  shout,  “Though  the  number  of  the  sons  of 
Israel be like the sands of the sea, it is a remnant that will be 
saved,”  that  is  only  about  55,000  in  the  first  three 
contingents.  “For  the  LORD  will  execute  His  word  on  the 
earth  thoroughly  and  swiftly,”  that  is,  His  judgment  of  exile 
as  well  as  the  preservation  of  a  remnant.  However  for  Paul, 
the  big  point  is  the  maintenance  of  this  remnant  until  the 
present time, and thus the fulfillment of God’s covenant, not 
its  negation.  Thus  God’s  calling  to  the  Jews  remains,  Q.E.D, 
v. 6.  
 
b)  God’s distinguishing call of Jews (Isa. 1:9), v. 29. 
 
This is prophetic confirmation of the preceding truth, namely 
that  only  God’s  covenant  mercy  in  His  calling  and 
preservation of the remnant, but here designated as a “seed” 
and  likewise  in  v.  8  as  “the  children  of  promise,” 
distinguishes  Israel  from  such  dregs  as  the  inhabitants  of 
Sodom and Gomorrah. Again, the distinctive characteristic of 
this  remnant  is  not  even  faith  or  intrinsic  righteousness,  but 
“God  who  has  mercy,”  v.  16  (cf.  Mal.  3:6;  Rom.  11:28-29). 
                                                                                                                                                          
universally.” Romans, p. 301. See W. Edward Glenny in Dispensationalism, Israel, and the Church, pp. 176-
9, also S. Lewis Johnson in The Coming Millennial Kingdom, pp. 203-6. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  292
Thus  Haldane  comments:  “Had  it  not  been  for  this  election, 
through  which  God  had  before  prepared  vessels  of  mercy 
unto  glory,  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile  would  have  escaped,  but 
all  would  have  remained  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  for 
destruction.”
61
 
 
4.  Distinguished as children through the righteousness of faith, vs. 30-33. 
 
It is significant that the role of faith has not been referred to in this chapter up to this 
point, though it will now be mentioned three times, and especially the key expression, 
“the righteousness which is by faith. This leads us to conclude that Paul, while having 
emphasized  the  significance  of  faith,  especially  in  chs.  3-4,  now  reverts  to  its  non-
meritorious characteristic, its pivotal importance following the establishment of God’s 
absolute sovereignty in the saving of sinners. 
In  a  similar  vein,  it  is  also  significant  that  the  terms  “faith”  and  “righteousness,”  so 
dominant  in  Romans  3-8,  not  having  been  mentioned  in  9:1-29,  are  now  once  again 
given familiar prominence. It would seem that while divine sovereignty and particular 
election  are  of  fundamental  importance,  especially  as  they  relate  to  the  saving  of  the 
remnant  Jew  up  to  the  present,  yet  the  particulars  of  the  gospel  are  not  to  be 
disregarded now that we have just been reminded of the incorporation of the Gentile in 
vs.  24-26.  This  reclaimed  thrust  will  continue  into  10:1-21  where  “faith”  and 
“righteousness” remain as prominent terms, though still with particular application to 
Israel as a nation. 
 
a.  Faith righteousness that the Gentiles attained, v. 30. 
 
“What  shall  we  say  then?”  is  a  rallying  call  that  redirects  focus  from  God’s 
sovereign dealing with the Jew and Gentile to a paradox that relates to the present 
status  of  the  Jew  and  Gentile  in  terms  of  the  gospel  of  justification  by  faith. 
Presently,  we  have  the  condition  of  “Gentiles  who  did  not  pursue  [were  not 
running as an athlete, hunting, pressing for as a passionate pursuit, present tense 
of dièkw, dio¯ ko¯ ] righteousness.” There they were in the “streets and lanes” of this 
world minding their own defiling business and pagan religion, without a thought 
for Moses and his distinct righteous claims, when suddenly they found themselves 
invited to a divine banquet. Without any pretension, while aware of their poverty 
and  unworthiness,  as  with  the  centurion  who  confessed,  “Lord,  .  .  .  I  am  not 
worthy  for  You  to  come  under  my  roof”  (Luke  7:6),  they  accepted,  they 
“attained” or “seized” at the point of faith [aorist katalamb£nw, katalambano¯ ] the 
free  grace  that  confronted  them.  They  believed  the  offer  of  grace  and  were 
accepted!  They  were  “the  poor  and  crippled  and  blind  and  lame”  who  were 
invited to God’s “big dinner” (Luke 14:16-24).
62
 
                                              
61
  Haldane, Romans, p. 501. 
62
  Refer to the helpful exposition of R. C. Trench, Notes on the Parables of our Lord, pp. 127-31 in which he 
not only distinguishes this parable from that of the Marriage of the King’s Son in Matt. 22:1-14, but points 
out that the slave represents those initial “preachers, evangelists, [and] apostles” who were spurned by Israel 
in general and subsequent “ambassadors of Christ” who urge the Gentiles to partake of this feast of grace. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  293
The  result  is  that  Gentiles  obtained  “righteousness,”  but  more  specifically  “the 
righteousness  of  [solely  obtained  through]  faith,”  as  distinct  from  righteousness 
derived  from  “the  law  of  works”  (3:27).  As  the  following  context  indicates,  this 
righteousness is wholly disassociated from the law of Moses, and obviously is that 
righteousness  which  is  perfectly  embodied  in  Jesus  Christ’s  atonement  and 
imputed  through  faith  alone.  Such  sola  fide  is  that  of  Abraham,  “who  believed 
God  ,  and  it  was  credited  to  him  as  righteousness”  (6:3).  Hence,  this  is  a 
righteousness  of  legal  standing;  the  idea  of  a  progressive  righteousness,  which  in 
fact  they  were  not  pursuing,  is  untenable  in  the  light  of  the  ungodly  status  of 
Gentiles here described. This is the righteousness that justifies through faith alone 
(1:16; 3:21-22, 28, 30; 4:3-5, 9-12), the gift of righteousness (5:17).  
 
b.  Faith righteousness that Israel squandered, vs. 31-33. 
 
But  what  of  Israel,  that  is  the  nation  as  a  whole?  To  begin  with,  by  way  of 
contrast, it had a “law of righteousness” set before it; but what was that “law”? 
Contrast  with  the  lack  of  Gentile  pursuit  would  suggest  the  distinctive  law  of 
Moses, the law that elicits the “practice of righteousness” (10:5), rather than law 
as a general principle 
63
 
 
(1)  Striving, they did not achieve, v. 31. 
 
 It was “hunting, pressing for, as a passionate pursuit [present tense of dièkw, 
dio¯ ko¯ ], righteousness,” which legal standard of required perfection it did not 
arrive  at  or  attain  (Gal.  3:10;  5:3).  This  was  “a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  in 
accordance  with  knowledge”  (10:2),  as  embodied  in  Saul  before  he  became 
Paul  (Acts  22:3;  Gal.  1:14).  However,  Israel  did  not  achieve  that  which  it 
sought, and implicit here is human inability in this regard (8:3-4),
64
 as well as 
a misunderstanding concerning the true purpose of the law (Gal. 3:19, 21). 
 
(2)  Working, they did not believe, v. 32a. 
 
But why did not Israel achieve God-pleasing conformity to that “Mosaic law 
of  righteousness”  which  it  so  zealously  pursued?  To  begin  with,  Paul  does 
not  answer  that  Israel’s  failure  here  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  “Potter” 
created an insufficient number of “vessels of mercy” ( cf. vs. 21-23)! Here he 
is  simply  concerned  with  accountability.  In  a  sense  the  nation  became 
seemingly so near and yet in reality so far from a saving knowledge of God. 
While  having  privileged  status,  yet  the  Jews  were  void  of  the  true 
characteristics of that status. So how could Israel be such a contradiction? 
 
(a)  Israel  did  not  pursue  God  by  faith.  As  a  people  already  redeemed,  it 
misused  the  law  by  attributing  to  it  saving  rather  than  sanctifying 
power.  As  the  children  of  God  through  the  grace  of  redemption  from 
Egypt,  their  redeemed  status  was  perverted.  The  Jews  did  not  deny 
                                              
63
  “Law  of  Moses”  is  supported  by  Cranfield,  Hodge,  Lenski,  Moo,  Morris,  Stott;  “law  as  principle”  is 
supported by Murray. 
64
  Moo, Romans, p. 627. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  294
faith, but rather believed in synergistic, bilateral religion, whereby faith 
and  works  unite  to  consummate  salvation.  Redemption  out  of  Egypt 
was  certainly  all  of  grace;  the  only  response  required  was  faith  in  the 
passover  lamb  (Ex.  12:13)  and  God’s  saving  power  (Ex.  14:13). 
However, following this deliverance of God, the place of the law for an 
already redeemed people was misapplied. In other words, Israel bought 
into Galatianism (Gal. 3:1-3).  
 
(b)  Israel did pursue God by works. Again, the Jews did not seek salvation 
by  works  alone.  Their  attitude  is  best  reflected  by  the  Pharisee  who 
prayed,  “God,  I  thank  You  that  I  am  not  like  other  people:  swindlers, 
unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  like  this  [contemptible]  tax  collector.  I  fast 
twice a week; I pay tithes of all that I get” (Luke 18:11-12). Of course 
the  gratitude  for  grace  was  merely  patronage,  while  the  declaration  of 
works  was  proud  publicity.  Faith  here  was  for  infused  grace,  not  faith 
in  the  sole  saving  power  of  God!  The  result  was  failure  in  several 
realms.  First  the  Jews  did  not  achieve  the  standard  they  aspired  to. 
Second  they  did  not  gain  justification  with  God,  but  rather 
condemnation.  Third,  they  degenerated  into  proud  hypocrisy.  Fourth, 
they  ended  up  crucifying  their  Messiah  who  had  become  “a  stone  of 
stumbling, and a rock of offense,” v. 33. 
 
(3)  Pursuing, they stumbled, v. 32b-33. 
 
  It  may  well  be  that  here  Paul  further  alludes  to  a  favorite  athletic 
representation of spiritual pilgrimage. “Pursuing” in vs. 30-31, present tense 
of dièkw, dio¯ ko¯ , and by inference in v. 32a, is qualified by the tragedy of a 
“fall”  with  regard  to  the  Jews.  They  “stumbled  over  [aorist  of  proskÒptw, 
proskopto¯ ]  the  stumbling  stone  [prÒskomma  proskomma],”  that  is  in  their 
strenuous pursuit of works righteousness, a “stone” of pure redeeming grace 
appeared in their way that caused them to be confounded and fall.  
 
(a)  The “stone” is Christ, cf. v. 33b; 10:11, a “living stone,” ordained to be 
“the  very  corner  stone”  of  “a  spiritual  house”  (  I  Pet.  2:4-7),  “a  holy 
temple in the Lord, . . . a dwelling of God in the Spirit” (Eph. 2:19-22), 
who  gets  in  the  way  of  attempted  salvation  through  works 
righteousness;  he  is  a  sore  irritant  to  all  legalism.  Thus  he  becomes  a 
disturbing interruption, an “offense” or “stumbling block,” sk£ndalon, 
skandalon  (I  Cor.  1:23;  cf.  Gal.  5:11).  One  option  is  to  attempt  to 
run  over  and  crush  that  which  gets  in  the  way  of  human  works 
religion (John 11:47-50), v.  32b. 
 
(b)  The  “stone”  of  Christ’s  righteousness  conflicts  with  legal  works.  The 
quotation of Isaiah 28:16; 8:14 declares that God set such a disturbing 
stone in the center of Judaism or “Zion,” again, so as to build “the city 
of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem”  (Heb.  12:22).  Contrary  to 
militant  efforts  to  eliminate  such  humiliating  intrusion,  this  same 
“stone”  of  Christ’s  atonement,  his  righteous  person  and  redemptive 
work, elicits solitary faith that repudiates self-righteousness and wholly 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S ELECTION  295
believes  in  this  propitiatory,  substitutionary  righteousness.  Further, 
concerning the opponents of this “stone” (God the Son) which God the 
Father  has  firmly  set  in  Jerusalem,  “the  stone  which  the  builders 
rejected, this became the chief corner stone; . . . and he who falls on this 
stone  will  be  broken  to  pieces;  but  on  whomever  it  falls,  it  will  scatter 
him like dust” (Matt. 21:42, 44),  v. 33.  
 
(c)  Just  as  the  Gentiles  attained  “the  righteousness  which  is  “by  faith,”  v. 
30,  and  Israel  did  not  pursue  this  same  acceptable  righteousness  “by 
faith,”  v.  32,  so  sola  fide  is  the  vital  principle  of  v.  33.  In  context,  the 
point  here  is  that,  “he  [the  Jew]  who  exclusively  believes  [is  believing, 
present participle] in Him [Jesus Christ as the lamb of God] will not be 
disappointed  [put  to  shame  at  the  day  of  reckoning,  cf.  ‘be  disturbed,’ 
Is. 28:16].” Why is this so? The hymn writer pens the divine response : 
The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose, 
I will not, I will not desert to his foes; 
That soul, tho’ all hell should endeavour to shake, 
I’ll never, no never, no never forsake.  
 
CHAPTER XII 
 
ROMANS 10:1-21 - THE GOSPEL  
AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION 
 
 
HE conclusion of 9:30-33, having focused on the significance of absent sola fide with regard 
to unbelieving Israel in contrast with the Gentiles, now leads to ongoing concern about this 
lack  of  saving  faith  in  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Such  heartfelt  anxiety  is  introduced  with  restated 
passion being reminiscent of 9:1-5. While Paul acknowledges that “they are not all Israel who are 
descended from Israel,” v. 6, and that presently there is “a remnant according to God’s gracious 
choice”  (11:5;  cf.  9:27),  yet  we  notice  that  a  wider  national  hope  is  here  envisaged  that  finds 
climactic exposition in 11:1-36.  
 
A.  Israel needs salvation from self-righteousness, vs. 1-13. 
 
Not  unlike  the  flow  of  ch.  9  where  the  particular  concern  of  God  for  “vessels  of  mercy” 
within  Israel  as  distinct  from  “vessels  of  wrath,”  vs.  22-23,  gives  way  to  the  universal 
principle  of  “the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith,”  vs.  30  concerning  “he  who  believes  in 
Him,”  v.  33,  so  here  Paul’s  particular  concern  for  unbelieving  Israel,  vs.  1-3,  again  gives 
way  to  that  same  universal  principle  with  regard  to  “everyone  who  believes,”  v.  4.  “the 
word of faith,” v. 8, “whoever believes in Him,” v. 11, and “whoever will call on the name 
of the LORD will be saved,” v. 13.  
 
1.  Salvation by God’s righteousness, vs. 1-3. 
 
The  key  term  here  which  identifies  the  essential  void  in  religious  Israel  is  also  that 
which is the key term for the gospel in Romans, namely “the righteousness of God,” v. 
3, (cf. 1:17; 3:5, 21-22), which is also closely related to “the righteousness which is by 
faith,” (3:22; 9:30; 10:6; Phil. 3:9). 
 
a.  From divine alienation, v. 1. 
 
“Brethren  [in  Christ  in  Rome],  the  goodwill  [eÙdok…a,  eudokia]  of  my  heart,  in 
entreating  [dšomai,  deomai]  God  on  behalf  of  them  [national  Israel],  is  for  their 
salvation.”  Clearly  Paul  is  concerned  here  for  the  larger  unbelieving  segment 
within Israel rather than the believing remnant. Further, at this point he does not 
believe  that  God  has  given  up  on  the  nation  as  a  whole  otherwise  his  prayer 
would  be  senseless.  Bengel  makes  a  frequently  cited  comment:  “Paul  would  not 
have  prayed  if  they  [Israel]  had  been  absolutely  reprobate.”
1
  Lenski  makes  the 
startling comment that this prayer was not in vain since it “won the forty years of 
                                              
1
  Quoted by A. T. Robertson, Word Pictures In The New Testament, IV, p. 387. Bengel was a highly esteemed 
Lutheran scholar of the eighteenth century whose exegesis of the New Testament, Gnomon Novi Testamenti, 
remains a classic. Shedd, though accepting a national conversion in 11:26, attempts to explain here that, “the 
Apostle’s prayer would have been natural and proper, even though it were a fact in the divine mind that the 
subjects of the prayer were reprobated.” Romans, p. 311. Given that this is so, it still makes Paul’s inspired 
prayer to have been a vain exercise.   
T 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  297
grace  for  Israel,  and  many  were  saved.”
2
  Assuming  he  is  referring  to  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  70  AD,  and  Romans  was  written  c.  55  AD,
3
  then  in 
fact this period of grace would only be for 15 years, according to the perspective 
of  Paul!  However,  this  comment  illustrates  the  poverty of  such  a  suggestion  that 
Israel’s  existence  forever  ceased  at  70  AD.  To  begin  with,  there  is  simply  no 
statement in Scripture that following this second major destruction of the temple, 
the church would become the permanent replacement for Israel. After Christ wept 
over  the  bankrupt  leadership  of  Jerusalem,  he  declared,  “Behold,  your  house  is 
being  left  to  you desolate!”  However  he  continues:  “For I  say  to  you,  from now 
on you will not see Me until you say, ‘Blessed is He who comes in the name of the 
Lord’”  (Matt.  23:38-39).  Even  the  promise,  “the  kingdom  of  God  will  be  taken 
away  from  you  and  given  to  a  people,  producing  the  fruit  of  it”  (Matt.  21:43) 
follows the quotation of Ps. 118:22 where v. 26 declares, “Blessed is the one who 
comes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord”  (cf.  Matt.  23:38-39).  Further  consider  Luke 
21:24,  “Jerusalem  will  be  trampled  under  foot  by  the  Gentiles  until  the  times  of 
the Gentiles are fulfilled,” also the compelling argument of 11:1-32.  
Again we encounter an attitude toward unbelieving Jews, still retaining a covenant 
relationship with God while dispersed in unbelief (Hos. 3:4-5), that ought to be a 
model  for  all  Christians,  in  much  the  same  way  as  we  ought  to  lovingly  act 
toward unbelieving relatives. 
 
b.  From ignorant zeal, v. 2. 
 
Zeal  is  the  dynamic  of  sincerity,  yet  both  characteristics  lead  to  running  adrift 
amidst  dangerous  shoals  of  error  when  there  is  no  direction  by  means  of  the 
rudder  of  substantial  knowledge  (Prov.  19:2).  So  from  personal  experience  Paul 
testifies,  “I  bear  witness  about  them  [national  Israel]  that  they  are  ceaselessly 
zealous for the God of Abraham; however such enthusiasm is void of direction by 
means of comprehensive knowledge about this gospel of the righteousness by faith 
which I desire for them.” “Zeal” itself is neutral, so that it is a quality of the Lord 
Jesus  (John  2:17),  the  pagan  populace  of  Ephesus  (Acts  19:34),  and  particularly 
unconverted Paul (Acts 22:3; 26:5, 9; Gal. 1:14; Phil. 3:6). Here he describes that 
religious  mania  which  lacks  discrimination.  As  John  Stott  writes:  “The  proper 
word for zeal without knowledge, commitment without reflection, or enthusiasm 
without  understanding,  is  fanaticism.  And  fanaticism  is  a  horrid  and  dangerous 
state to be in.”
 4
 In fact it is a close cousin of bigotry! 
Rather the validation of zeal is “knowledge” or ™p…gnwsij, epigno¯ sis, an intensive 
form of gnèsij, gno¯ sis, meaning a more mature, profound compre- hension of the 
saving  grace  of  God  rather  than  that  which  is  merely  superficial  and  basic  (cf. 
1:28; 3:20). The absence of such spiritual discernment results in “learning” while 
“never [being] able to come to the knowledge [™p…gnwsij, epigno¯ sis] of the truth” 
(II Tim. 3:7). Naked zeal in religious pursuits will be counterproductive; the only 
                                              
2
   R. C. H. Lenski, Romans, p. 646. 
3
   According to Barrett, Morris, though 57-58 A.D. is commonly held. 
4
   John Stott, Romans, p. 280. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  298
zeal  that  counts  is  the  zeal  of  faith  and  the  zeal  that  faith  produces.  As  Toplady 
has written: 
   Could my zeal no respite know, 
   Could my tears for ever flow, 
   All for sin could not atone; 
   Thou must save, and Thou alone.  
 
c.  From human righteousness, v. 3. 
 
“For  not  knowing  [¢gnošw,  agnoeo¯ ]  about  God’s  [saving,  faith]  righteousness” 
while  retaining  comprehensive  Bible  knowledge,  v.  2,  means  that  Israel  was 
willfully “agnostic” due to a monumental misconception in the light of revealed, 
inscripturated  truth.  Certainly  the  Jews  were  aware  of  God’s  essential  moral 
righteousness,  but  they  had  blinded  themselves  to  “the  righteousness  of  faith,” 
9:31-32;  10:6,  the  faith  of  Abraham  and  David,  4:3-8.  As  a  consequence,  Israel 
set about “to establish [lay a foundation of] their own [righteousness],” a whole 
system  whereby  faith  and  works  were  amalgamated,  and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
rendered  unnecessary.  Thus,  when  confronted  with  “the  [saving/faith] 
righteousness  of  God,”  or  when  “faith  [righteousness]  has  come,  .  .  .  when  the 
fulness of time came, [and] God sent forth His son” (Gal. 3:25; 4:4), then “they 
[Israel]  did  not  subject  themselves  [aorist  of  Øpot£ssw,  hupotasso¯ ,  “to  rank 
under,”]  to  the  righteousness  of  God.”  That  is,  they  would  not  “submit 
themselves  [with  the  obedience  of  faith]”  to  their  saving  Messiah.  Rather,  in 
“stumbling  over  a  rock  of  offense,”  9:32-33,  the  Jews  repudiated  Christ  (Luke 
19:14; John 19:15), God’s incarnate revelation of pure saving grace, and clung to 
their  own  man-centered  scheme  of  religion,  the  error  of  Galatianism,  a  broken 
reed that would pierce them through with many a sorrow (Is. 36:6-7). 
 
2.  Salvation by Christ’s righteousness, vs. 4-5. 
 
The conclusion of v. 3 injects the historic fact of “the righteousness of God,” an event 
preceded  by  a  dispensation  whereby  “we  were  kept  in  custody  under  the  law,  being 
shut  up  to  the  faith  which  was  later  to  be  revealed”  (Gal.  3:23).  However,  now  that 
Christ  has  come,  “the  righteousness  of  God  [faith]  has  been  revealed,”  1:17,  that  is, 
“now that faith [the righteousness of faith] has come, we are no longer under a tutor 
[the  law]”  (Gal.  3:25).  Therefore,  and  this  is  the  point  now  to  be  emphasized,  in  the 
course  of  God’s  salvation  plan  in  history,  Moses  has  come  to  a  point  of  concluding 
fulfillment  whereby,  to  allude  to  John  the  Baptist’s  humble  confession,  “He  [Christ] 
must  increase,  but  I  [as  representative  of  the  passing  Old  Testament  economy]  must 
decrease” (John 3:30).    
 
a.  Culmination in Christ’s fulfilling righteousness through faith alone, v. 4. 
 
We expand in translation this definitive statement
5
 concerning Christ and the law 
as  follows:  “For  Christ  is  the  culminating  end  [tšloj,  telos,  of  the  law 
                                              
5
   Cranfield  describes  it  as  “clearly  one  of  the  fundamental  theses  of  Pauline  theology  as  a  whole,  since,  in 
whatever way it is taken, it is obviously a decisive statement concerning the relation of Christ and the law.” 
Romans, II, p. 515. Likewise Moo. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  299
administration  of  Moses,  that  is  for  those  who  in  believing  embrace  the  gospel 
administration  of  the  righteousness  of  faith  alone  in  Christ.”
6
  An  alternative 
expanded translation would be: “For Christ is the culminating end of the corrupt 
abuse of the law by the Jews
7
 that more correctly leads to justification, that is for 
those who in believing embrace the righteousness that is solely through faith and 
as  a  result  continue  to  submit  to  the  moral  administration  and  law  of  Moses.”
8
 
The  significant  difference  here  concerns  whether  the  law  of  Moses  has  ongoing 
usefulness  in  the  sanctification  of  the  Christian.  There  are  three  key  issues  to  be 
considered here. 
The meaning of “law,” which for most commentators is the law of Moses, is more 
specifically  the  Mosaic  administration  or  institution  that  includes  the  moral  law 
or ten commandments, as the context of 9:31, 10:5 seems to plainly indicate. The 
meaning  of  “end”  or  tšloj,  telos,  in  an  emphatic  position,  could  be,  (i) 
“termination/end  in  time”  (I  Cor.  15:24)  being  most  predominant,  or  (ii) 
“goal/end completion” (I Tim. 1:5), or (iii) “fulfillment/result” (Rom. 6:21), and 
in combination. Hence, most likely Christ’s coming has brought about the end of 
the  Mosaic  administration,  both  its  right  and  wrong  use,  yet  not  in  a  detached 
sense  since  the  Son  of  God  has  instituted  a  new  era  for  which  Moses  was  both 
preparatory and a stimulus (Gal. 3:23-26). So Moo well states: “Paul is implying 
that Christ is the ‘end’ of the law (he brings its era to a close) and its ‘goal’ (he is 
what  the  law  anticipated  and  pointed  toward).  The  English  word  ‘end’  perfectly 
captures the nuance; but if it is thought that it implies too temporal a meaning, we 
might  also  use  the  words  ‘culmination,’  ‘consummation,’  or  ‘climax.’”
9
  So 
Matthew 5:17 closely parallels this understanding of “the end of the law”: which 
in  7:12  is  described  as  “holy  and  righteous  and  good.”  Christ  did  not  come  “to 
abolish  [the  law]  but  to  fulfill,”  not  “to  disannul  but  to  bring  full  realization”
10
 
through  the  supplanting  of “the ministry of death  and  condemnation”  by means 
of the transcendently more glorious “ministry of the Spirit and righteousness” (II 
Cor. 3:7-9). 
Thus the new administration has become inaugurated through “the righteousness 
of  faith”  superceding  circumcision  through  which  entrance  was  made  into  the 
whole of the old administration of Moses (Acts 15:5, 11). However, we hasten to 
                                              
6
   For  detailed  grammatical  support  of  this  rendering,  refer  to  Moo  who  translates,  “Christ  is  the  telos  of  the 
law,  with  the  result  that  there  is  (or  with  the  purpose  that  there  might  be)  righteousness  for  everyone  who 
believes,”  rather  than  as  the  NASB,  “For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  everyone  who 
believes.” Romans, 636-8, also Cranfield.  
7
   This  is  the  language  of Calvin,  Romans,  pp.  284-5. However,  Murray  comments here:  “Paul  is  speaking  of 
‘law’ as commandment, not of the Mosaic law in any specific sense but of law as demanding obedience, and 
therefore  in  the  most  general  sense  of  law-righteousness  as  opposed  to  faith-righteousness.”  Romans,  II,  p. 
51. 
8
   As  Walter  Chantry  describes  this  point  of  view,  “the  New  Testament  binds  the  Ten  Commandments  upon 
Christian consciences.” God’s Righteous Kingdom, p. 114, being directly contradicted by John Bunyan who 
writes, “I may not, will not, cannot, dare not make it [the law of God] my savior and judge, nor suffer it to 
set  up  its  government  in  my  conscience;  for  by  so  doing  I  fall  from  grace,  and  Christ  Jesus  doth  profit  me 
nothing (Gal. 5:1-5).” Works, II, p. 388. 
9
   Moo, Romans, p. 641. 
10
  This is Gary Long’s excellent translation. Biblical Law and Ethics: Absolute and Covenantal. An Exegetical 
and Theological Study of Matthew 5:17-20. p. 25. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  300
be  reminded  that  the  “righteousness”  which  faith  looks  to  is  exclusively  that  of 
Christ.  This  must  be  kept  in  mind  as  “faith”  predominates  through  to  v.  13. 
While  righteousness  has  ever  been  the  requirement  of  God  for  His  personal 
creation, it has ever been provided only through faith. It was available to the pre-
Israel  generation  through  faith  alone  (4:9-11;  Heb.  11:4-7),  likewise  to  Israel 
throughout  its  history  even  though  it  added  a  works  principle  to  faith,  and 
beyond  to  the  Gentiles  who  more  readily  grasped  the  principle  (9:30-31).  The 
principle  of  “righteousness  by  faith”  or  free  grace  nullifies  the  supposed 
instrumentality of law in the transformation of the unholy to the holy, yet the law 
according  to  its  most  comprehensive  meaning,  retains  its  rightful  place.  “[T]he 
Law is good, if one uses it lawfully, realizing the fact that the law is not made for 
a righteous person, but for those who are lawless and rebellious, for the ungodly 
and sinners, for the unholy and profane” (I Tim. 1:8-9). For this reason, the Law 
“was added because of transgressions” (Gal. 3:19).  
To sum up, Moo explains that, 
[Paul] is picturing the Mosaic law as the center of an epoch in God’s dealings with 
human  beings  that  has  now  come  to  an  end.  The  believer’s  relationship  to  God  is 
mediated  in  and  through  Christ,  and  the  Mosaic  law  is  no  longer  basic  to  that 
relationship.  But  Paul  is  not  saying  that  Christ  has  ended  all  ‘law’;  the  believer 
remains bound to God’s law as it now is mediated in and through Christ (Gal. 6:2; I 
Cor.  9:19-21).  Nor  is  he  saying  that  the  Mosaic  law  is  no  longer  part  of  God’s 
revelation or of no more use to the believer. The Mosaic law, like all of Scripture, is 
‘profitable’  for  the  believer  (II  Tim.  3:16)  and  must  continue  to  be  read,  pondered, 
and responded to by the faithful believer.
11
 
 
b.  Exclusion of Moses’ righteousness requiring legal obedience, v. 5. 
 
Here is explanation of v. 4, and specifically how “Christ is the end of the law.”
12
 
The free quotation of Leviticus 18:5 is intended to describe the modus operandi of 
the  Mosaic  administration  that  Christ  has  supplanted.  That  is,  under  the  Law, 
“you  shall  keep  My  statutes  and  My  judgments,  by  which  a  man  may  live  if  he 
does  them;  I  am  the  LORD”  (Lev.  18:5).  While  Murray  declares  this  to  be,  “an 
adequate  and  watertight  definition  of  the  principle  of  legalism,”  nevertheless  he 
then  proceeds  to  assert  that  these  words,  “do  not  find  their  place  in  a  legalistic 
framework but in that of the grace which the [Mosaic] covenant bespoke.”
13
 This 
understanding rests heavily on a strict understanding of Leviticus 18:5. However 
the apparent sense is akin to the contrast of 9:30-31; 10:3, while the use again of 
Leviticus  18:5  in  Galatians  3:12  seems  to  conclusively  indicate  that  Paul  is 
describing  a  legal  as  distinct  from  a  faith  proposition.  The  key  here  is  the 
expression  concerning  the  man  who,  “practices  [aorist  of  poišw,  poieo¯ ]  the 
                                              
11
  Moo, Romans, p. 642. 
12
  Cranfield succinctly states that, “without much fear of contradiction: (i) the g£r indicates that either v. 5 by 
itself or the whole of vv. 5-8 is thought of as being in some way explanatory of v. 4; (ii) there is a contrast 
between v. 5 and vv. 6-8 (hence the d • in v. 6); (iii) the verse contains a quotation from Leviticus 18:5. 
13
  Murray,  Romans,  II,  p.  51-52.  Refer  to  his  Appendix  B,  pp.  249-51  for  an  extended  defense  of  this 
interpretation, which upholds the concept of “grace in law.” Barth and Cranfield have a similar perspective. 
Morris  sits  on  the  fence,  while  Calvin,  Lenski,  Luther,  Moo,  Stott,  assert  that  Paul  describes  a  legal  rather 
than a faith righteousness. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  301
righteousness which is based on law,” which is so obviously antithetical to Paul’s 
repeated emphasis on “the righteousness based on faith,” v. 6. Such zeal for legal 
living  through  which  the  righteousness  of  God  might  be  attained,  by  means  of 
bold human initiative, will be described with the use of hyperbole in vs. 6-7.  
Here  again,  Paul  is  contrasting  the  administration  of  Christ,  v.  4,  with  that  of 
Moses,  v.  5.  So  in  vs.  6-7,  the  zealous  faith  and  works  administration  will  be 
contrasted  with  that  of  faith  alone  righteousness  in  vs.  8-13.  Here  we  are  faced 
with  two  opposing  world  views,  not  merely  a  slight  gospel  variation.  Luther 
comments: 
Nothing  but  faith  can  accomplish  this  [salvation],  for  it  puts  out  the  eyes  of  all 
wisdom of the flesh, causing men to know nothing, to be prepared to be taught and 
led  and  to  hear  promptly  and  to  give in.  For  God  does  not  require  a magnitude  of 
good  works  but  the  mortification  of  the  old  man.  And  he  is  not  mortified  except 
through  faith,  which  humbles  our  own  feeling  of  self-importance  and  makes  a 
person subject to that of another. For the whole life of the old man is concentrated 
in  the  feelings,  mind,  or  wisdom  and  prudence  of  the  flesh,  just  as  the  life  of  a 
serpent is in its head. And so when the head is crushed, the entire old man is dead. 
As I have said, what causes this is faith in the Word of God.
14
 
 
3.  Salvation by faith righteousness, v. 6-13. 
 
   The forgoing understanding of v. 5 accentuates the dominant thrust of vs. 6-13, namely 
justification  by  faith  alone,  “for  all  those  who  believe,  for  there  is  no  distinction” 
(3:22). The contrast between “the one who works” and “the one who does not work, 
but  believes”  (4:4-5)  receives  further  prominence  While  Paul’s  concern  for  faithless 
Israel will be regathered at v. 14, for the moment his passion for the essence of gospel 
purity  finds  yet  another  carefully  reasoned  eruption.  The  repeated  emphasis  here  on 
“faith” all the more nullifies the error of both Galatianism and Roman Catholicism. 
 
a.  It is accessible to all, vs. 6-10. 
 
While  for  Paul  “faith”  presupposes  its  glorious  saving  object  because  he  is  so 
intent  on  upholding  the  unalloyed  character  of  saving  grace,  there  are  periodic 
reminders  of  the  specific  focus  of  faith  in  Christ.  Here  we  are  exposed  to  the 
wondrous truth that a man does not have to labor to reach out to God, wherever 
He may be; rather “the Son of Man has come to seek and to save that which was 
lost” (Matt. 19:10), with the result that “He is not far from each one of us” (Acts 
17:27).  Therefore,  human  exertion  in  a  religious  quest,  the  scaling  of  heaven  or 
searching  of  the  depths,  is  not  necessary;  the  sole  requirement  is  faith  in  the 
“publicly portrayed” Christ (Gal. 3:1), “the Man whom He [God] has appointed, 
having furnished proof to all men by raising Him from the dead” (Acts 18:31). 
 
(1)  As negatively illustrated by Moses, vs. 6-7. 
 
There  is  an  intended  contrast  here  between  “Moses”  who  “writes”  in  v.  5 
and  “faith”  who  “speaks”  in  v.  6.  Here  are  two  opposite  revelations,  the 
former concerning human salvation activity that is feverish and zealous, the 
                                              
14
  Luther, Romans, 25, p. 407. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  302
latter concerning salvation rest through faith in the accomplished activity of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  whole  analogy  of  “ascent”  and  “descent”  is 
reminiscent  of  Ephesians  4:7-10;  it  is  also  possible  that  Paul  may  have  in 
mind Moses’ ascent and descent on Mt. Sinai when he received from God the 
tables of the law covenant. 
 
(a)  Not by ascending to heaven, v. 6. 
 
An  expanded  translation  reads:  “But  the  righteousness  of  God  that 
proceeds from and is grounded solely upon faith in Christ speaks quite 
differently  from  the  tenor  of  Moses  as  represented  by  the  allusion  to 
Leviticus 18:5 just quoted. Therefore, according to the grace orientation 
of Deuteronomy 9:4-6,
15
 do not respond in your heart toward salvation 
with  the  works/activist  orientation  reflected  in  Deuteronomy  30:12 
where  Moses  describes  the  difficulty  of  ascending  to  heaven  (cf.  Prov. 
30:3-4;  Isa.  14:12-13).  That  is,  don’t  think  of  salvation  as  a  task  that 
you have to initiate by scaling heaven so as to bring Christ down upon 
earth to die for you!” Such human endeavor is not only impossible, but 
also  unnecessary  since  God  declared  to  Israel,  “But  the  word  is  very 
near you” (Deut. 30:14); so now the revelation of the gospel of Christ is 
likewise  accessible  to  Jew  and  Gentile  without  the  contribution  of 
human righteousness. When man contemplates, “What must I do, what 
effort  must  I  expend  to  be  saved?”  he  needs  to  hear  God’s  gospel 
message, “I have already done it all. Believe and be saved.” 
 
(b)  Not by descending to the abyss, v. 7. 
 
Further in expanded translation, “Do not respond in your heart toward 
salvation  with  the  works/activist  orientation  reflected  in  Deuteronomy 
30:13 where Moses describes the difficulty of crossing the ocean, which 
is analogous to descending into the abyss of death. That is, don’t think 
of  salvation  as  a  task  that  you  have  to  initiate  by  personal  descent 
through the portals of death so that you might call upon Christ to rise 
from  the  dead  so  as  to  save  you!”  Why?  Because  Christ  has  already 
risen  from  the  dead.  Again,  sovereign  and  gracious  initiative  has 
accomplished  a  complete  saving  work.  In  vs.  6-7  we  have  the  natural 
man’s  religious  efforts  exemplified.  He  must  not  only  seek  God, 
wherever He may be found, but also be energetic in his religious efforts 
to a spectacular degree; his quest for God must be impressive. Whereas 
God  declares:  “Listen  to  Me,  you  stubborn-minded,  who  are  far  from 
righteousness.  I  bring  near  My  righteousness,  it  is  not  far  off”  (Isa. 
46:13). 
 
 
 
                                              
15
  Moo  rightly  draws  attention  to  the  fragment  of  Deuteronomy  9:4,  “Do  not  say  in  your  heart,”  cf.  8:17, 
which,  in  the  larger  context  of  vs.  4-6,  describes  God’s  gracious  covenant  faithfulness,  and  supports  the 
contrasting legal righteousness view of Romans 10:5. Romans, pp. 650-51. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  303
(2)  As positively applied from Moses, vs. 8-10. 
 
In each of these three verses “mouth” and “heart” are prominent due to the 
stimulation of Moses in Deuteronomy 30:14. The “heart” is the vital organ, 
representing  a  man’s  personal/mental/moral  core,  where  salvation  is  rooted, 
while the “mouth” is the expressive instrument of the converted “heart.” It is 
significant  that  the  state  of  the  heart  must  inevitably  express  itself.  If  every 
action has an equal and opposite reaction, then every truly converted child of 
God  will  manifestly  respond  when  the  heart  is  renewed,  even  as  ignition 
leads to radiation, as germination leads to the sprouting forth of shoots, buds 
and  flowers.  As  Paul  writes  in  II  Corinthians  4:14,  quoting  Psalm  116:10, 
“But having the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, ‘I believed, 
therefore I spoke,’ we also believe, therefore we also speak.” 
 
(a)  The preached word of faith is near for mouth and heart, v. 8. 
 
The personification of “the righteousness of faith” is identical with v. 6, 
and  again  in  contrast  with  v.  5.  The  quotation  here  of  Deuteronomy 
30:14 follows on from vs. 12-13 just cited, concerning which v. 11 has 
declared,  “this  commandment  which  I  command  you  today  is  not  too 
difficult for you, nor is it out of reach.” Hence Paul concludes with the 
same  point  here,  namely  that  right  now  “the  word”  tÕ ·Áma,  to  re¯ ma, 
which more specifically is “the word of the faith,” tÕ ·ÁmatÁj p…stewj, 
to  re¯ ma  te¯s  pisteo¯ s,  is  readily  accessible  and  plain.  As  the  Word  from 
God  via  Moses  had  been  taught  to  the  Hebrews  at  Sinai  and 
consequently had lodged in their souls, so Paul infers that the saints at 
Rome, both Jew and Gentile, have likewise received the preached word. 
“Word”  or  ·Áma,  re¯ma,  here,  also  vs.  17-18,  is  infrequently  used  by 
Paul,  and  it  is  distinguished  from  lÒgoj,  logos,  or  “the  objective 
record,” as “the proclaimed gospel message.” Such preaching, that Paul 
and his companions have been occupied with in Rome, is of “the word 
that  calls  for  faith.”
16
  Israel  longed  for  life  in  the  carnality  of  Egypt, 
whereas  life  from  God  was  immediately  available  through  faith;  the 
prodigal son sought life in the far country, whereas life from his father 
was  immediately  available  through  faith.  Barrett  adds:  “Faith,  as  a 
divine  possibility,  is  an  immediate  possibility.  That  which  man  might 
seek  in  heaven  or  hell  in  vain  is  at  his  side.  Faith  alone  is  what  God 
seeks, and that he himself provides.”
17
    
 
(b)  The offered word of faith is near for mouth and heart, v. 9. 
 
The  assumption  is,  according  to  v.  8,  that  faithful  preaching  has 
resulted in the truth of the gospel lodging in the soul; yet there has been 
no embrace of faith. For some this received message is “foolishness” (I 
Cor.  2:14),  while  for  others  it  is  “the  power  of  God  for  salvation  to 
everyone  who  believes”  (Rom.  1:16).  The  conditional  offer  here  is, 
                                              
16
  Ibid. p. 657. 
17
  Barrett, Romans, p. 199. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  304
according  to  A.  T.  Robertson,  third  class,  or  “undetermined,  but  with 
the  prospect  of  determination.”
18
  The  order  concerns  confession  that 
results  from  the  renewed  heart,  whereas  v.  10  deals  with  the  renewed 
heart  that  results  in  confession.  To  “confess,”  Ðmologšw,  homologeo¯ , 
means  to  say  the  same  thing,  that  is  to  express  agreement  with,  to 
declare,  avow,  (cf.  I  Tim.  6:12-13;  I  John  1:9).  Specifically,  the  voiced 
agreement from the heart is that “Jesus [is] LORD,” that is deity (I Cor. 
12:3;  Phil.  2:9-11),  as  opposed  to  saying  that  “Caesar  is  LORD.”  Such 
confession  results,  at  the  same  time,  in  submission  to  the  sovereign 
authority  that  this  understanding  of  Christ’s  deity  demands.  However, 
implicit  here  is  the  body  of  doctrine  that  leads  to  this  conclusion  that 
“Jesus [is] LORD,” namely the whole gospel whereby Jesus Christ, “was 
delivered over  [to  death]  because of  our  transgressions,  and  was raised 
because  of  our  justification,”  4:25.  Paul  is  not  describing  a  two-tier 
mode  of  conversion,  but  rather  the  expectation  that  faith  in  the  heart 
will  bloom;  faith  incognito  is  not  a  soft  option.  Haldane  comments: 
“Confession of Christ is as necessary as faith in Him, but necessary for 
a  different  purpose.  Faith  is  necessary  to  obtain  the  gift  of 
righteousness. Confession is necessary to prove that this gift is received. 
If  a  man  does  not  confess  Christ  at  the  hazard  of  life,  character, 
property,  liberty,  and  everything  dear  to  him,  he  has  not  the  faith  of 
Christ.”
19
 
 
(c)  The operative word of faith is near for heart and mouth, v. 10. 
 
Whereas  in  v.  9  the  witness  to  the  word  lodged  in  the  heart  is 
emphasized,  here  the  process  that  incorporates  faith  and  confession  is 
explained.  As  if  to  offer  clarification,  Paul  returns  to  the  fundamental 
centrality  of  faith  alone  (present  tense)  that  results  in  righteousness, 
4:13;  5:17; 9:30;  10:6. Again,  the  resultant  effect  of  faith  is  confession 
(present tense) that results in future, fulfilled salvation. Thus faith, in all 
of  its  focused  simplicity,  in  all  of  its  renunciation  of  self  and  works  of 
any  kind,  in  all  of  its  singular  apprehension  of  Christ’s  substitutionary 
righteousness,  in  all  of  its  acknowledgment  that  salvation  is  wholly  of 
the  Lord,  yet  must  be  distinguished  from  the  counterfeit  and  validated 
by its fruit (Jas. 2:26). Again, true faith will inevitably manifest itself. 
 
b.  It is universal to all, vs. 11-13. 
 
From v.6 on, in contrast with a legal righteousness, faith alone in the accessible, 
imminent word of the gospel results in free justifying righteousness. But whereas 
faith  alone  is  the  sole  operative  principle  for  the  guilty  sinner,  that  is  all  that  he 
has  to  do,  there  is  at  the  same  time  an  inherent  universal principle  that  excludes 
human distinctions. If faith alone justifies, then all who have the faculty for faith 
are accountable for it alone being solicited. The issue here is not personal ability, 
                                              
18
  A.  T.  Robertson,  A  Grammar  Of  The  Greek  New  testament,  p.  1016;  also  Word  Pictures  In  The  New 
Testament, IV, p. 389. 
19
  Haldane, Romans, p. 516. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  305
or  the  reception  of  the  gift  of  faith,  or  identification  of  vessels  fitted  either  for 
mercy  or  destruction.  The  sole  concern  of  Paul  is  the  ready  availability  of  the 
gospel for mankind without distinction. Therefore a universal solicitation of faith 
from  all  of  mankind  is  plainly  implicit,  though  as  vs.  14-15  indicate,  this  call  to 
believe presupposes the preaching of the gospel to begin with. 
 
(1)  The Scripture invites whoever believes, vs. 11. 
 
Isaiah  28:16  was  more  fully  quoted  in  9:33,  whereas  here  a  partial  quote 
assumes  the  object  of  faith  to  be  “a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of 
offense.”  The  emphatic  thrust  concerns,  “whoever  believes  in  Him  will  not 
be  disappointed.”  The  addition  by  Paul  of  “whoever”  or  “everyone”  p©j, 
pas, is legitimate extrapolation, supported by Joel 2:32 quoted in v. 13, that 
prepares  the  way  for  v.  12.  Barrett  adds:  “In  the  back  of  his  [Paul’s]  mind, 
the dominant question is still, Why have the Jews been rejected? And a major 
part  of  the  answer  to  this  question  is  (see  ch.  11),  In  order  that  the  gospel 
may be preached to all, Gentiles as well as Jews. Paul proceeds to emphasize 
this.”
20
  The  Apostle’s  heritage  of  narrow,  bigoted  Judaism  must  have 
heightened his subsequent wonder at the universality of the gospel. 
 
(2)  The Lord is rich toward Jew and Greek, v. 12.  
 
“For there is no distinction” positively refers to both Jew and Gentile being 
equally recipients of the riches of grace through Christ, that is according to 
the  sole  requirement  of  earnest  faith.  Romans  3:22b  uses  the  identical 
expression except that negatively both Jew and Gentile are equally sinners in 
the sight of God. Thus God is the one God of both Jews and Gentiles, “who 
will  justify  the  circumcised  by  faith  and  the  uncircumcised  through  faith” 
(3:29-30).  Here  the  operative  term  is  “faith,”  or  “calling  on  Him,”  where 
™pikalšw,  epikaleo¯ ,  means  “calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord,”  as  v.  13 
confirms.  This  is  the  exclusive  name  of  Jehovah/Yahweh  which  is  here 
identified with Jesus. Implicit here is the readiness of God, specifically God 
the  Son  who  in  v.  9  is  designated  as  Lord,  to  mercifully  heed  the  cry  of 
either  Jewish  sinners  or  Gentile  sinners.  Such  willingness  is  amply 
demonstrated  in  Jesus  Christ’s  kind  reception  of  the  Roman  Centurion 
(Matt.  8:5-13),  the  Syrophoenician  woman  (Matt.  15:21-28),  as  well  as 
his  appreciation  of  the  mercy  that  the  widow  of  Zarephath  and  Naman 
the Syrian received (Luke 4:25-27). Here the wealth of divine compassion 
is demonstrated in terms of depth, not simply universal breadth. 
 
(3)  The Scripture invites whoever calls, v. 13. 
 
The  quotation  here  of  Joel  2:32  recalls  Peter’s  use  of  this  same  text  at 
Pentecost when he addressed “men of Israel”(Acts 2:21-22). Of course Joel’s 
exhortation  to  “call  on  the  name  of  the  LORD”  was  with  reference  to 
Jehovah/Yahweh, while here, as with Acts 2:21-22, it clearly means to “call 
[believe]  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  [Jesus  Christ]”  (cf.  Acts  4:12)  who  is,  as 
                                              
20
  Barrett, Romans, p. 202. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  306
God  the  Son,  that  same  LORD.  Here  is  universal  availability  that  brings 
universal  accountability  without  the  assumption  of  universal  ability.  The 
“whoever”  or  “anyone/any  person”  relates  to  the  “all”  of  v.  12.  The 
particularity of 9:16, 18 ought not to cloud the universal offer that is plainly 
indicated here.  
So Spurgeon, fully convinced of particular election and redemption, preached 
concerning this verse: 
Do  you  say,  ‘I  am  excluded.  Surely,  you  cannot  mean  that  he  would  save 
me?’  Hark  you;  it  says,  ‘Whosoever’  —  ‘whosoever’  is  a  great  wide  door, 
and  lets  in  big  sinners.  Oh,  surely,  if  it  says,  ‘whosoever,’  you  are  not 
excluded if you call — there is the point. . . . Oh! I would to God I might 
know that some soul could lay hold on this promise! Where are you? Are 
you  standing  away  among  the  crowd  there,  or  sitting  here  in  the  body  of 
the hall or in the topmost gallery? Are you feeling your sins? Do you shed 
tears  in  secret  on  account  of  them?  Do  you  lament  your  iniquities?  Oh! 
take  his  promise  —‘Whosoever  (sweet  whosoever!)  —  whosoever  calleth 
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.’ Say thus. The devil says it is of 
no  use  for  you  to  call;  you  have  been  a  drunkard.  Tell  him  it  says, 
‘Whosoever,’  ‘Nay,’  says  the  evil  spirit,  ‘it  is  of  no  use  for  you,  you  have 
never  been  to  hear  a  sermon,  or  been  in  the  house  of  God  these  last  ten 
years.’  Tell  him  it  says,  ‘Whosoever.’  ‘No,’  says  Satan,  ‘remember  the  sins 
of  last  night,  and how  you  have  come  up  to  the  MUSIC  HALL  stained  with 
lust.’  Tell  the  devil  it  says.  ‘Whosoever,’  and  that  it  is  a  foul  falsehood  of 
his, that you can call on God and yet be lost. 
21
 
 
B.  Israel needs salvation from obstinacy, vs. 14-21. 
 
In line with vs. 2-3, 16, 19, “they” brings the focus back to national Israel. The accessibility 
of  the  word  being  “near  you,  in  your  heart  and  mouth,”  and  thus  this  availability  for 
“calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,”  vs.  11-13,  has  brought  accountability.  However,  a 
further aspect of the nearness of the gospel message concerning “the word of faith” is that it 
requires “preaching” v. 8, even as Paul’s ministry epitomized. Indeed in the history of Israel 
the inscripturated word was to be proclaimed, whether by parent in the home (Deut. 6:6-7), 
or prophet and priest in the temple and synagogue. The context of Deuteronomy 30:11-14 
previously  considered  is  that  of  Moses  making  proclamation  to  the  Israelites  as  distinct 
from mere recommended reading. In other words, God reveals that mere literary availability 
is  not  enough.  There  must  be  preaching,  as  Paul  now  makes  clear.  Dare  we  suggest  then 
that,  in  these  more  recent  centuries  of  the  abounding  printed  page,  and  with  ready 
acknowledgment  of  the  great  blessings  that  literature  distribution  has  brought  through 
missionary outreach, yet preaching of that printed word must have the greater prominence.  
 
1.  Israel has need of the preached gospel, vs. 14-15.  
 
The  logical  sequence  here  of  four  questions  is  not  what  might  be  expected;  an 
evangelistic  perspective  would  suggest  that  sending  leads  to  preaching,  then  hearing, 
then  faith,  then  calling  on  the  Lord.  Instead  Paul  provides  the  opposite  order  so  that 
the focus is upon the sent preacher. 
                                              
21
  C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, “Seeking Souls,” III, Sermon 140, pp. 454, 6. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  307
a.  The necessity of faith, v. 14a. 
 
From  the  assertion  of  v.  13  comes  the  necessity  of  faith,  which  probably  means 
agreement with propositional, biblical, gospel truth. In other words, there must be 
genuine  agreement  with  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Savior,  that  there  is  an 
invitation  for  the  sinner  to  call  on  this  Savior  for  salvation.  But  more  than 
believing this, there must be the smitten lamb’s cry or call for mercy to the Good 
Shepherd. There is a vast distinction between knowledge of the gospel and casting 
your soul upon it, even as there is a difference between going to hell or heaven. 
 
b.  The necessity of hearing, v. 14b. 
 
However, before faith lays hold of the truth with agreement, it must first be heard 
with  understanding.  There  must  be  the  broadcast  of  gospel  truth  on  the  same 
waveband  as  the  receiver.  There  must  be  distinct  communication  in  a  “known 
tongue  [language]”  since  “if  the  bugle  produces  an  indistinct  sound,  who  will 
prepare  himself  for  the  battle?”  (I  Cor.  14:8-9).  There  will  be  recognition  and 
reception of a coherent message about biblical reality. 
 
c.  The necessity of preaching, v. 14c. 
 
However  hearing  is  vain  if  there  is  nothing  to  hear.  Hence  there  must  be 
“heralding,”  khrÚssw,  ke¯ russo¯ ,  that  is  proclamation,  preaching,  but  specifically 
the  message  of  Christ  that  is  preached.  In  Paul’s  day  there  were  few  books,  no 
video,  audio  media;  personal  declaration  was  everything.  But  is  the  personal 
element  so  vital  today?  History  would  indicate  that  there  has  been  no  revival 
without the primacy of personal preaching. Other means are useful, but all have a 
degree  of  remoteness  about  them.  Whereas  the  preacher  is  an  ambassador 
speaking on behalf of his King, not simply a truth mediator. 
 
d.  The necessity of sending, v. 15. 
 
Here  is  what  distinguishes  the  authentic  Christian  preacher  from  the  false  (Jer. 
14:14;  23:21;  27:15),  that  is  his  authoritative  commissioning,  his  being  sent  by 
divine appointment, ¢postšllw, apostello¯ , cf. 1:1, 5. Lloyd-Jones explains that,  
preaching is never something that a man decides to do. What happens rather is that 
he  becomes  conscious  of  a  ‘call.’”  He  goes  on  to  give  five  elements  of  this  “call” 
being, 1. a consciousness within the human spirit, 2. encouragement from others, 3. 
a concern for others, 4. a constraint or compulsion, 5. a sense of unworthiness. He 
further adds: “[A] man who feels he is competent, that he can do this easily, . . . has 
never been ‘called.’ . . . The man who is called by God . . . so realizes the awfulness 
of the task that he shrinks from it.
22
 
So Paul quotes Isaiah 52:7 as support for the preaching office. With an a fortiori 
sense,  as  captive  Judah  in  Babylon  was  to  rejoice  at  the  messengers  announcing 
the good news of deliverance, so New Testament gospel messengers are even more 
delightful.  Thus  allusion  may  also  be  made  to  Paul  and  his  associates  as 
                                              
22
 D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Preaching and Preachers, pp. 104-7. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  308
preachers, v. 8, for the word of the gospel is not only near, but also preached to 
the  Jew  as  was  always  his  custom  in  a  new  region,  as  well  as  the  Gentile. 
However, he was all too aware of the rejection in general that he experienced, and 
so he responds in vs. 16-21. 
 
2.  Israel has shunned the preaching of Isaiah, vs. 16-17. 
 
Remember that Paul the preacher, v. 8, in upholding the primacy of preaching, is very 
much recalling his own experience of being called to proclaim (Acts 9:15). At the same 
time,  like  every  faithful  herald,  he  appreciates  the  divide  that  separates  him  from  his 
congregation  which  only  Spirit  wrought  faith  can  bridge.  How  often  he  would  pour 
out his heart to the Jews with an expectant passion only to receive a scornful rejection. 
Many a time he pondered, with a sorrowing and incredulous heart, the riddle of such 
stark unbelief that God’s covenant people so resolutely maintained; such contemplation 
inevitably led him to the recollection of Israel’s scandalous past according to Scripture.  
 
a.  Faith then was to be in the preacher’s report, v. 16. 
 
There is a strong contrast here with the significant role of the preacher described 
in  v.  15.  “However,  Israel  as  a  whole  did  not  respond  with  obedient  faith 
[ØpakoÚw,  hupakouo¯ ,  cf.  1:5;  16:26]  in  the  preached  gospel,”  even  though  a 
remnant  did.  There  has  been  preaching  and  hearing,  even  as  Isaiah  rhetorically 
lamented, literally, “who has believed that which is to be heard” (Isa. 53:1);  but 
there  has  been  no  faith,  and  thus  no  revelation  of  the  saving  arm  of  the  Lord 
(John 12:36-38). Thus the course of Israel’s history has been marked with unbelief 
until Pentecost. Even then the response was relatively small when compared with 
the overall population. 
 
b.  Faith today is to be in the word of Christ, v. 17. 
 
So  the  missing  yet  vital  element  is  faith,  and  Paul  is  anxious  to  analyze  the 
question  of  responsibility  in  this  regard.  Hence,  in  parallel  with  v.  14,  faith  is 
predicated upon hearing, while hearing is predicated upon exposure to “the word 
of  Christ  [·»matoj  CristoÚ,  rhe¯ matos  Christou],”  which  is  the  content  of  the 
preaching  of  v.  14.  Therefore,  in  the  light  of  Israel’s  entrenched  unbelief,  the 
implied question might be put colloquially, “Did Israel really hear what God was 
proclaiming? Their endemic unbelief might lead one to believe otherwise.” 
 
3.  Israel has heard the word and is accountable, v. 18. 
 
Like v. 16, Paul uses another strong adversative; his question using a double negative is 
in  fact  an  emphatic  denial:  “But  surely,  in  no  way  could  it  possibly  be  said  that  they 
[Israel]
23
  did  not  hear  [the  word  of  Christ]?”  Such  a  thought  is  emphatically  rejected. 
Proof  of  Israel’s  accountability  is  the  use  of  Psalm  19:4  by  way  of  logical  extension 
rather  than  exact  interpretation.  This  verse,  being  representative  of  vs.  1-6,  describes 
                                              
23
  Calvin and Haldane believe that the Gentiles are described here, especially in view of the quotation of Psalm 
19:4,  though the  broad  context  as  well as  most  commentators,  including  Alford,  Barrett, Cranfield,  Lenski, 
Moo, Morris, Murray, Stott, would seem to be against this. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S DEFECTION  309
the    universal  testimony  of  natural  revelation  to  the  glory  of  God,  specifically  the 
extensive “loud” witness of the “silent” heavens. Therefore the witness of the gospel is 
similarly  universal.  That  is,  Israel  has  heard  the  gospel  since  “their  voice,”  that  is  of 
preachers, “has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.” 
Murray  writes:  “Since  the  gospel  proclamation  is  now  to  all  without  distinction,  it  is 
proper  to  see  the  parallel  between  the  universality  of  general  revelation  and  the 
universalism of the gospel.”
24
 Even by the time of c. 55-8 AD as Paul writes, the gospel 
has spread throughout the universe of Judaism (Acts 1:8; 2:8-11; 19:10).  
 
4.  Israel has known the word and is accountable, vs. 19-21. 
 
As  with  v.  18,  a  similarly  structured  question  is  asked  that,  using  a  double  negative, 
indicates  an  emphatic  denial.  Thus,  by  way  of  expansion,  “Although  Israel  heard  the 
facts  of  the  word  of  Christ,  that  is  the  gospel  inclusive  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  did 
they  actually  know  [comprehend]  about  that  which  their  ears  received?”  Again,  this 
suggestion is definitely rejected, and proof follows from the words of Moses and Isaiah 
that focus on the inclusion of the Gentiles in God’s saving purposes. Thus Israel is fully 
accountable  for  its  strident  opposition  to  the  saving  righteousness  of  God  which  is 
through faith alone for Jew or Gentile, cf. vs. 12-13. 
 
a.  The Law revealed God’s provocation of Israel to jealousy, v. 19. 
 
The  quotation  of  Deuteronomy  32:21  draws  upon  the  preceding  context  of  vs. 
15-20  where  Israel  “forsook  God  who  made  him,  and  scorned  the  Rock  of  his 
salvation. . . . [Israel] neglected the Rock who begot you, and forgot the God who 
gave you birth.  . . [Israel] provoked Me to anger with their idols.” Consequently, 
God incorporates the Gentiles, “which is not a nation” alluding to Hosea quoted 
in 9:25-26, in His gospel intentions so as to provoke Israel to jealousy, cf. 11:11, 
14. This provision of grace to the Gentiles that stimulates a jealous response from 
the Jews is well illustrated in the parables of the Laborers in the Vineyard (Matt. 
20:1-16),  and  the  Prodigal  Son  (Luke  15:11-32).  Such  riling  of  the  Jew 
nevertheless has his salvation as God’s ultimate intent, 11:28-31. The point is that 
Israel  is  not  ignorant  of  the  gospel  of  free  grace;  it  is  accountable  for  its  blatant 
unbelief. 
 
b.  The Prophets revealed God’s seeking of the Gentiles for salvation, v. 20. 
 
The  quotation  of  Isaiah  65:1  is  said  to  be  “very  bold,”  that  is  forthright  in  its 
declaration  of  God’s  graciousness  toward  the  Gentiles  when  compared  with  the 
stubborn  rebellion  of  His  covenant  people  described  in  v.  2.
25
  The  thought  is 
similar  to  9:30  where  the  Gentiles  “who  did  not  pursue  righteousness,  attained 
righteousness.”  So  here  the  Gentiles  who  “did  not  seek  Me,  .  .  .  did  not  ask  for 
Me,”  yet  were  confronted  with  God  freely  presenting  Himself  to  them.  Stott 
rightly describes this as “dramatic imagery for grace, God taking the initiative to 
                                              
24
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 61. 
25
  Clearly  Paul  contrasts  the  Gentiles  in  Isaiah  65:1  with  the  Jews  in  v.  2.  However,  many  scholars,  including 
Delitzsch,  consider  Isaiah 65:1,  in  context  with  ch.  64,  as a  reference  to  Israel, which  Moo describes  as  the 
majority view. Contra are Alford, Lenski, Stier, Young. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  310
make himself known.”
26
 To recall the thought of vs. 6-8, God does not have to be 
sought  either  in  the  heights  of  heaven  or  the  depths  of  hell;  rather  He  is  “near” 
because  He  has determined  to make  Himself near,  to “come  to  seek  and  to  save 
that which was lost” (Luke 19:10). 
 
c.  The Prophets revealed God’s endurance of recalcitrant Israel, v. 21. 
 
Here, as with v. 19, “Israel” clearly means the nation as a whole, but particularly 
that  greater  unbelieving  proportion.  There  is  intentional  contrast  with  the 
preceding  thought,  namely  that  “the  word of  Christ,” so  graciously presented  to 
unclean  and  relatively  responsive  Gentiles,  yet  is  so  vigorously  rejected  by 
“kosher”  Jews.  The  quotation  of  Isaiah  65:2  portrays  an  exceedingly  forbearing 
God with arms outstretched, and, from a human perspective, intolerable contempt 
from  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord.  Having  “heard”  and  “known”  concerning  the 
extensive  grace  of  God,  the  Jews  are  utterly  without  excuse.  Thus  in  terms  of 
failure,  Israel’s  qualification  is  total.  Murray  adds:  “The  perversity  of  Israel,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  constancy  and  intensity  of  God’s  lovingkindness,  on  the 
other, are accentuated by the fact that the one derives its character from the other. 
It  is  to  a  disobedient  and  contradicting  people  that  the  outstretched  hands  of 
entreaty  are  extended.  The  gravity  of  the  sin  springs  from  the  contradiction 
offered to the overtures of mercy.”
27
 
So  the  vital  question  now  concerns  God’s  ultimate  response.  Does  He  break  or 
keep  covenant  with  Israel?  If  God  saves  a  people,  is  it  possible  for  them  to  be 
finally lost? Romans 11 provides an unequivocal answer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
26
  Stott, Romans, p. 289. 
27
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 63. 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
 
ROMANS 11:1-36 - THE GOSPEL  
AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION 
 
 
N the history of human kind, there is one race that stands out above all others with regard to 
resilience in the face of persecution and unstoppable existence; it is plainly the Jew, whose very 
name is synonymous with the most malicious slander and persistent vilification that any group of 
people has ever experienced. We have already maintained that Paul was decidedly pro-Semitic in 
spite of the intense persecution which he, “a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin” 
(Rom. 11:1), “a Hebrew of the Hebrews” (Phil. 3:5), frequently faced from his fellow co-patriots; 
at times he was not beyond responding with intense indignation (I Thess. 2:14-16), yet love for 
his  “brethren  according  to  the  flesh”  (Rom.  9:3)  proved  to  be  unquenchable.  If  ever  an 
opportunity presented itself for Paul to renounce unbelieving Israel once and for all it would be at 
this  juncture  where  the  argument  of  chapter  10  has  so  conclusively  demonstrated  the 
accountability  of  the  Jew  for  his  blatant  rebellion  against  the  light  of  the  gospel.  A  similar 
situation  presented  itself  in  2:28-29  where  we  were  told  that,  “he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  one 
outwardly,  nor  is  circumcision  that  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh.  But  he  is  a  Jew  who  is  one 
inwardly; and circumcision is that which is of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter; and his 
praise  is  not  from  men,  but  from  God.”  Surely  at  that  point  the  extinction  of  national  Judaism 
could have here been affirmed once and for all. But we immediately read: “Then what advantage 
has  the  Jew?  Or  what  is  the  benefit  of  circumcision?  Great  in  every  respect.”  So  here  at  the 
commencement  of  Romans  11  we  find  another  passionate  endorsement  for  the  national 
descendents of Abraham that has aroused intense investigation in challenging anti-Semitism and 
a-Semitism, both racial and theological, at their roots.  
During the Nuremberg Trial of the Nazi war criminals in 1945, one of the most despicable of all 
of  these  unsavory  defendants  was  Julius  Streicher,  a  man  obsessed  with  hatred  for  the  Jews.  In 
the  course  of  his  defense  he  audaciously  quoted  the  rancorous,  anti-Semitic    writings  of  Martin 
Luther,  concerning  which  the  Luther  scholar,  Jaroslav  Pelikan,  has  called  for  frank 
acknowledgment  that  this  animosity  was  simply  beyond  defense.
1
  However,  we  ought  not  to 
think  that  the  German  Reformer’s  attitude  was  distinctive.  Another  important  Luther  Scholar, 
Heiko  Obermann,  also  concluded  that  “all  of  the  great  figures  of  the  [Reformation]  age,  as 
diverse  as  they  were  on  almost  every  other  issue,  stood  united  as  anti-Jew”  thus  providing  “a 
point  of  continuity  from  medieval  to  modern  society.”
2
  Hence  the  Reformers  were  but 
participants in ongoing antipathy, toward conceding any God-acknowledged status for the Jew, 
that  had  originated  in  the  early  church  and  been  fostered,  especially  since  Constantine,  on 
through the Medieval centuries. Thus Calvin Theological Seminary Professor, David E. Holwerda 
writes:  
From the early days of the Church the opinion that the Jews had been disinherited as a result of their 
unbelief was widely held. Many believed that the Jews’ role in the history of redemption had come to 
an  end.  Already  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  Justin  Martyr,  in  his  famous  Dialogue  with 
                                              
1
   Clark  M.  Williamson,  Has  God  Rejected  His  People?  p.  101.  “Luther’s  last  sermon,  preached  a  few  days 
before his death, importunately appealed that all Jews be driven from Germany,” p. 102. 
2
   Eugene J. Fisher, “Anti-Semitism and Christianity: Theories and Revisions of Theories.” Persistent Prejudice: 
Perspectives On Anti-Semitism, edited by Herbert Hirsch and Jack D. Spiro, p. 23. 
I 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  312
Trypho, argued that Christians, not Jews, were the children of Abraham, those who formed the new 
nation that would inhabit the Holy Land during the millennial reign of Christ. God’s covenant with 
Abraham  was  in  effect  established  with  Gentile  Christians,  not  with  Jews.  The  Jews  had  been 
excluded  from  the  purposes  of  God.  This  expressed  view  became  dominant  for  centuries  in  the 
Church, and the Reformation did not significantly change it.
3
 
Certainly the most notorious example of such early anti-Semitic acrimony comes from the fourth 
century  “golden-mouthed”  expositor  and  Bishop  of  Constantinople,  John  Chrysostom.  From  a 
series of sermons entitled, “Eight Orations Against The Jews,” Catholic scholar Edward Flannery 
provides the following quotations:  
How can Christians dare ‘have the slightest converse’ with Jews, ‘most miserable of all men’ (Homily 
4:1),  men  who  are  ‘.  .  .  lustful,  rapacious,  greedy,  perfidious  bandits.’  Are  they  not  ‘inveterate 
murderers,  destroyers,  men  possessed  by  the  devil’  whom  ‘debauchery  and  drunkenness  has  given 
them  the  manners  of  the  pig  and  the  lusty  goat.’  .  .  .  ‘[T]hey  have  surpassed  the  ferocity  of  wild 
beasts,  for  they  murder  their  offspring  and  immolate  them  to  the  devil’  (1:6).  .  .  .  Indeed  Jews 
worship  the  devil;  their  rites  are  ‘criminal  and  impure;’  their  religion  is  ‘a  disease’  (3:1).  Their 
synagogue, again, is ‘an assembly of criminals . . . a den of thieves . . . a cavern of devils, an abyss of 
perdition’ (1:2, 6:6).
4
 
Not surprisingly, Chrysostom understood, concerning Romans 9-11, that “[T]he event of Christ 
and the New Covenant for the Gentiles have divested the Jews as a people of any special standing 
before God.”
5
 In a similar manner, for Augustine, “Judaism is simply relegated to the latter [non-
elect]  category,  and  its  status  in  salvation-history  assigned  to  the  pre-Christian  past.”
6
  So  we 
better  appreciate  the  similar  estimate  of  the  sixteenth  century  Augustinian  monk  of  Wittenberg 
born of a shameful legacy within the Catholic church. 
However, while we might ponder the course of western history had their been a different estimate 
concerning the future of Israel according to Scripture, and thus a more respectful attitude toward 
the  Jew,  nevertheless  there  has  been  a  lineage  of  Christians  that  has  evidenced  a  more 
considerate,  indeed  Pauline  appreciation  of  the  Hebrew  people.  While  acknowledging  the  hard-
heartedness  of  the  Jew to  this day and  the  jeopardy of his  soul  on account  of  unbelief,  yet  they 
have maintained an appreciation for the legacy that the Christian has nevertheless inherited from 
this people, and that chiefly being salvation by a Jew according to a Book that is largely Jewish. 
Because  of  love  for  this  Jewish  inheritance,  an  inevitable  result  has  been  interest  in  Jewish 
evangelism,  as  originated  in  Scotland  during  the  last  century  that  resulted  in  the  conversion  of 
such Hebrew Christians as Alfred Edersheim, David Baron, and Adolph Saphir.
7
 Horatius Bonar, 
in being associated with this movement and at the same time convinced of a national future for 
Israel according to Romans 11, wrote the following verses based on v. 1. 
 
                                              
3
   David E. Holwerda, Jesus & Israel, One Covenant or Two? p. 2. He draws upon Jeffrey S. Siker’s significant 
book,  Disinheriting The Jews,  which documents the gradual change that overtook the early church whereby 
the inclusion of the Gentiles (cf. Rom. 11:17) was supplanted by the concept of the exclusion of the Jews.  
4
   Edward H. Flannery, The Anguish Of The Jews, pp. 50-51. 
5
   Peter  Gorday,  Principles  Of  Patristic  Exegesis:  Romans  9-11  in  Origen,  John  Chrysostom,  and  Augustine, 
p.129. 
6
   Ibid., p. 333. 
7
   This thrust sprung from the interest of Robert Haldane and Thomas Chalmers in the Jews, and included the 
involvement  of  Robert  Candlish,  Robert  Murray  M.Cheyne,  and  Andrew  and  Horatius  Bonar.  During  that 
period the British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel amongst the Jews, founded in 1809, was flourish- 
ing and received the support of C. H. Spurgeon. David L.  Larsen, Jews Gentiles, & The Church, pp. 128-9. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  313
           Forgotten; no that cannot be; 
        All other names may pass away, 
        But thine, MY ISRAEL, shall remain 
        In everlasting memory. 
           Forgotten! No, that cannot be; 
        Inscribed upon My palms thou art, 
        The name I gave in days of old 
        Is graven still upon My heart. 
           Forgotten! No, that cannot be; 
        Beloved of thy God art thou 
        His crown forever on thy head, 
        His name forever on thy brow. 
           Forgotten! No, that cannot be: 
        Sun, moon, and stars may cease to shine, 
        But thou shalt be remembered still, 
        For thou art His and He is thine.
8
 
It is important to note that the last stanza of this hymn makes reference to Jeremiah 31:31-37 in 
which  God  makes  a  new  covenant  with  “the  house  of  Israel  and  with  the  house  of  Judah”  in 
which “I will put My law within them and on their heart I will write it; and I will be their God, 
and they shall be My people,” vs. 32-34. This promise is certified to be as sure as the fixity of the 
sun,  moon,  and  stars  in  the  heavens,  vs.  35-37,  and  it  would  seem  that  Paul  has  this  same 
conviction  regarding  the  certainty  of  national  Israel’s  restoration  and  regeneration  since,  “they 
are  beloved  for  the  sake  of  the  fathers;  for  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  irrevocable”  (Rom. 
11:28-29).  Ultimately  the  issue  here  is  one  of  God’s  covenant  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  His 
promises, and that without redefining the term “Israel.” Thus Haldane, in commenting on v. 27,  
concludes:  “Israel,  then,  shall  be  restored  to  their  own  land,  which  God  gave  for  an  everlasting 
possession. God hath said that He will make a full end of all the nations whither He had driven 
them,  but  He  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  them  (Jer.  46:28;  Ezek.  37:  21,  25).  ‘And  I  will  plant 
them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given 
them, saith the LORD thy God’ (Amos 9:15).”
9
  
However,  even  amongst  Christians  of  this  twentieth  century,  who  are  indebted  to  the 
Reformation  for  the  recovery  of  the  gospel  of  the  free  grace  of  God,  there  has  been  vigorous 
disagreement  with  regard  to  the  future  destiny  of  Israel.  And  this  writer  has  no  hesitation  in 
declaring,  from  the  outset,  his  strong  commitment  to  God’s  promise  of  a  regenerated  nation  of 
Israel  in  Palestine  under  its  acknowledged  Messiah,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Indeed,  it  is  believed 
that a prima facie reading of Romans 9-11 will readily lead to this conclusion; it is only when a 
preconceived  system  of  doctrine  becomes  dominant,  such  as  in  the  magisterium  or  teaching 
authority  of  the  Catholic  Church,  or  entrenched  covenant  theology,  or  denominational/creedal 
loyalty, that an alternative interpretation is desperately sought. Nevertheless, this being asserted, 
let one practical test be put to this whole contentious situation, and that is the question as to how 
one  looks  today  upon  Jews  in  general,  and  consider  how  it  measures  up  to  Paul’s  indomitable 
love  that  was  sorely  tested  yet  never  diminished.  In  meeting  a  confessing  Jew,  does  one  secretly 
regard that individual as a non-person, as self-deceived, as nationally beyond hope in the sight of 
God, as wholly deluded in terms of claiming to be a biblical Jew, as having carnal Zionist hopes, 
                                              
8
   Horatius Bonar, in Knight’s Master Book Of New Illustrations, p. 337. 
9
   Robert Haldane, Romans, p. 552.   
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  314
while one outwardly gives token and polite acknowledgment to that person being a Jew? Or does 
one  yet  regard  this  person  as  an  exile,  an  unbelieving  family  member,  “a  kinsman  [through 
Christ] according to the flesh” (9:3)? Surely this latter response is closer to the Apostle’s attitude 
and that which caused him to so vehemently respond: “Perish the thought; let it be unthinkable 
to  suggest  that  God  has  rejected  His  people.”  Cranfield  is  right  to  designate  Paul’s  dogmatic 
exclamation  here  as  being  not  only  reflective  of  national  Israel,  but  also  the  theme  of  this 
chapter.
10
  
 
A.  Israel’s rejection by God is denied, vs. 1-10. 
 
In  vs.  1-10  we  have  an  introductory  unit  in  terms  of  Paul’s  climactic  purpose  expressed  in 
vs.  11-36.  It  establishes  the  fact  that  within  Israel  as  a  whole,  only  a  remnant  is  presently 
saved, yet this in itself proves that God has not forsaken His people, even in an anticipated 
inclusive sense. 
 
1.  The proof of a remnant in Israel, vs. 1-6. 
 
Paul probably expects his readers to recall earlier remnants in the history of Israel, such 
as that which returned from the Babylonian captivity (Jer. 50:20) as well as that which 
in  the  future  will  be  regathered  after  being  scattered  abroad  (Jer.  23:3).  This  fact  of 
Israel’s  continuance  in  the  past,  in  spite  of  considerable  defection  from  the  faith  with 
resulting divine discipline, is good reason for confidence in Israel’s future.   
 
a.  Paul is an Israelite, v. 1. 
 
An expanded translation reads: “Therefore I raise a critical question in the light of 
such  abject  unbelief  [10:21].  God  has  not  rejected  His  people,  the  present 
unbelieving nation of Israel, has He? Surely not! No, a thousand times, no! For I 
myself am presently an Israelite, that is a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe and 
land allocation designated as Benjamin.” This denial is most emphatic, though the 
reason  for  such  certainty  is  connected  with  the  term  for  Israel  as  “His  people,” 
those  belonging  to  God  through  covenant  and  purchased  by  God  through 
redemption  (Deut.  31:6;  I  Sam.  2:22;  I  Kings  6:13;  Ps.  94:14).  The  point  is  that 
God  will  not  cast  aside,  in  a  final  sense,  those  who  belong  to  Him  since  His 
integrity would be at stake. In the light of the preceding context, Paul has more in 
mind  than  the  present  remnant,  and  that  is  the  salvation  of  the  larger  national 
body, his “kinsmen according to the flesh” (9:3; cf. 10:1). 
We believe that Paul is not speaking here of himself as an “Israelite” in the present 
tense as replacement theology might postulate, that is by claiming to be a secular 
Israelite  without  believing  in  any  divine,  covenantal,  national  recognition. 
Therefore  we  must  conclude  that  here  is  a  declaration  that  supports  the  relevant 
comment of John McRay that, “the book of Romans in its first century context, . 
.  .  will  demonstrate  that  Paul  was  not  a  16
th
  century  Protestant  Reformer  but  a 
first  century  Jewish Rabbi  who  accepted  Jesus  as  his  savior.”
11
  Hence while  Paul 
                                              
10
  Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 542, 574-77. 
11
  Cited by Joseph Shulam with Hillary Lecornu, A Commentary on The Jewish Roots of Romans, p. vi. McRay 
is Professor of New Testament and Archaeology at Wheaton College Graduate School. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  315
includes  himself  with  the  remnant,  yet  at  the  same  time  he  identifies  with  the 
nation  of  Israel  “according  to  the  flesh”  presently  comprised  of  “Israelites,  to 
whom  belongs  [present  tense]  the  adoption  as  sons,  and  the  glory  and  the 
covenants  and  the  giving  of  the  Law  and  the  temple  service  and  the  promises” 
(9:3-4).  In  boasting  of  being  a  Benjamite,  as  were  Saul,  and  Jeremiah,  Paul 
identifies with a distinct people whose strategic territory included Jerusalem.
12
 
There are those who in reality deny Paul’s affirmation here while using language 
that  is  ambiguous.  Some  like  Lenski  and  Pieters  agree  with  Paul  simply  because 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus  had  not  yet  taken  place;  however,  after  70 
AD  they  would  affirm  that  God  has  finally  finished  with  Israel  and  the  Jews. 
Others such as Calvin support Paul by using “Israel” inclusively of believing Jews 
and  Gentiles  in  the  church,  though  again  national  identity  has  been  lost.  Still 
others such as Hendriksen believe that Paul only has in mind a remnant to the end 
that  does  not  have  any  national  standing  in  the  sight  of  God.  All  of  these  views 
refuse to let the meaning of “Israelite/Israel” have its contextual national sense as 
do  Cranfield,  Haldane,  Moo,  Morris,  Murray,  and  undoubtedly  associated  with 
this perspective is a dominant, regrettable Reformation legacy concerning the Jews 
that lacks any passionate Pauline regard (9:3).
13
 
 
b.  Israel was foreknown, v. 2a.   
 
Paul  returns  to  the  thought  of  election  when  he  exclaims:  “God  has  not  rejected 
[spurned/permanently pushed aside] His people who in eternity past He foreknew 
[foreordained]  according  to  pure  forelove.”  Here  the  meaning  of  prosginèskw, 
proginosko¯ ,  describes  God’s  love  in  eternity  past  for  His  people  themselves,  and 
not  simply  things  about  them  according  to  prescience.  This  word  is  used  to 
describe  Christ  being  “foreknown”  (foreordained,  KJV)  in  I  Peter  1:20, 
presumably  by  the  Father.  Jeremiah  was  similarly  “foreknown/  foreloved”  even 
before  he  was  born  (Jer.  1:5).  So  here  Paul  has  the  same  thought  concerning  the 
Father’s  love  for  Israel  which  Amos  3:2  describes:  “You  only  have  I  chosen 
[known]  among  all  the  families  of  the  earth.”  Further,  such  “foreknowledge”  is 
                                              
12
  To  suggest,  as  some  do  such  as  Bruce,  Stott,  that  the  New  Testament  and  Paul  in  particular  are  silent  with 
regard to the land is to ignore the common Hebrew appreciation of “the covenants [and] . . . the promises” 
(9:4), the legacy of “the fathers . . .[and] the gifts and the calling of God” (11:28-29) as well as here being a 
“Benjamite” that would never dream of making such a disassociation. Refer to Walter Kaiser, “The Land of 
Israel and the Future Return (Zechariah 10:6-12),” Israel, The Land And The People, ed. H. Wayne House, 
pp. 209-27. Johannes Munck, in his classic work Christ & Israel, p. 12, notes that, “There,” ™ke‹, in 9:26 is 
“a natural designation for Palestine, in order to imply that the Gentile nations will gather in Jerusalem and 
the Messianic kingdom will be established there (cf. 11:26).”     
13
  Consider  Albertus  Pieters  who  in  his  The  Seed  Of  Abraham,  pp.  132-4,  as  a  professor  of  Dutch  Reformed 
convictions, writes that following the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD, the subsequent Jewish lineage was 
comprised of illegitimate usurpers. Thus, “their program [turned out to be] the exact opposite of Christ, and 
in  this  unholy  endeavor  they  were  only  too  successful,  with  the  result  that  untold  calamities  were  brought 
down upon themselves and upon the whole world. Ignorant that their separateness from the rest of the world 
was in the divine purpose temporary, they strove to render it permanent. Thus that which had been in itself 
good and holy became through their error a source of poison in the life of the world; and ‘The Jew’ became 
the  great  persistent  international  problem.”  Thus  replacement  theology  has  its  unpleasant  consequences, 
whereas, in general, those who see a divine future for national Israel, especially premillennialists, have been 
respectful and kindly toward the Jew even in his unbelief. For proof of this assertion refer to David Rausch, 
Fundamentalist Evangelicals And Anti-Semitism, pp. 206-8. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  316
surely intended to prompt recollection of that particular first link which attached 
to the “golden chain” of God’s predestinating purpose in 8:28-30. In the light of 
this, Israel’s participation in such a course determines that rejection, as proposed 
here, be regarded as quite impossible.  
However,  is  this  “foreknowledge”  concerning  “His  people”  with  respect  to  the 
nation as a whole or the elect remnant within the nation? “His people” here is a 
restatement of this expression in v. 1 where the context is surely with reference to 
“a  disobedient  and  obstinate  people”  described  in  10:21.
14
  Thus  Murray 
comments  that,  “Israel  had  been  elected  and  peculiarly  loved  and  thus 
distinguished  from  all  other  nations.”
15
  There  is  no  twist  of  meaning  from  the 
nation  to  the  elect.  What  follows  with  regard  to  evidence  of  a  past  and  present 
remnant  is  offered  as  proof  concerning  the  divine  perpetuity  and  future  of  the 
nation.  God,  in  eternity  past,  loved  a  nation  comprised  of  twelve  tribes  having a 
destiny  guaranteed  by  covenant  (Gen.  13:1-3;  Ezek.  37:21-22).  It  is  the  fixity  of 
the Abrahamic covenant that guarantees a present and future existence for Israel 
as a nation, even as vs. 28-29 affirm.
16
 
 
c.  Elijah represents a past remnant, vs. 2b-4. 
 
Following  the  victorious  contest  with  the  450  prophets  of  Baal  on  Mt.  Carmel, 
and immediate drought relief, Elijah flees from the fury of Jezebel in Jezreel to a 
cave at Mt. Sinai  (I Kgs. 19:8-9). He had earlier felt alone (I Kgs. 18:22), received 
divine  relief  from  hunger  and  depression  (I  Kgs.  19:4-8),  and  yet  again  becomes 
depressed feeling solitary in the prophetic ministry. All of Israel seems lost; divine 
intervention has not resulted in significant repentance. 
 
(1)  He is blind to God’s remnant, vs. 2b-3. 
 
In despair, Elijah pleads with God “against Israel,” because of seeming total 
spiritual  bankruptcy  (I  Kgs.  18:21),  which  contrasts  with    the  Gentile 
kindness of the widow of Zarephath (I Kgs. 17:8-16), so that he seeks divine 
judgment.  The  quotation  of  I  Kings  19:14  may  suggest  the  belief  of  Elijah 
that the day of final rejection has come. Jewish tradition indicates that: “The 
                                              
14
  Morris  explains  that  “Paul  is  referring  to  ‘the  people  he  foreknew’,  not  ‘those  of  his  people  whom  he 
foreknew.’” Romans, p. 399. Likewise Moo, Murray. 
15
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 68. 
16
  It  is  astonishing  therefore,  to  note  that  a  number  of  Calvinist  writers  and  commentators,  while  strenuously      
upholding the unconditional nature of the New Covenant, that is the security of its participants according to 
particular  electing  grace  even  though  subject  to  sober  warnings,  yet  are  reluctant  to  grant  the  same 
characteristic to the Abrahamic Covenant with regard to Israel’s early participation that also included sober 
warnings, and especially the unconditionality so plainly revealed in Genesis 15:1-21. William Cox writes that, 
“In Genesis 15:6 we read that Abraham ‘believed God’ and that it (Abraham’s belief) was counted unto him 
for  righteousness.  Belief  here  was  a  condition  (understood).  .  .  .  the  Old  Testament  promises  to  Israel  were 
conditional and . . . Israel failed to observe these conditions.” Biblical Studies In Final Things, pp. 50-55. Yet 
this author’s Calvinism would certainly confess the conditionality of faith in the New Testament to ultimately 
subsume under the biblical truth that saving faith is a sovereign bestowal. Also refer to Crenshaw and Gunn, 
Dispensationalism,  Today,  Yesterday,  and  Tomorrow,  where  Appendix  Three,  “Conditional  and 
Unconditional Covenants,” pp. 321-25, does not so much as mention Genesis 15, let alone consider the vital 
ramifications of the sovereignty of God here.  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  317
misdeeds of the people had swelled to such number that they could no longer 
reckon  upon  ‘the  merits  of  the  fathers’  to  intercede  for  them;  they  had 
overdrawn  their  account.  When  they  sank  to  the  point  of  degradation  at 
which they gave up the sign of the covenant, Elijah could control his wrath 
no longer, and he accused Israel before God.”
17
   
 
(2)  He is informed of God’s remnant, v. 4. 
 
So  Paul  confidently  reasons:  “But  what  is  the  divine  authoritative  response 
[crhmatismÒj, chre¯matismos, oracle]? ‘I have kept for myself seven thousand 
men  [households?]  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal’  [I  Kgs.  19:18].” 
Within  the  comprehensive  nation  of  Israel  in  the  flesh  God  had  preserved, 
according to His gracious working, a remnant, even larger when women and 
young people are included, comprised of Jews in flesh and Spirit. Elijah had a 
vision  that  was  too  exclusive  since  in  those  days  God  had  neither  forsaken 
Israel nor abandoned the Abrahamic covenant. Hence there is implicit hope 
here for Israel in the present and future.  
So  in  times  of  declension,  we  may  be  like  Paul  at  Corinth  who  appears  to 
have  been  so  depressed  and  fearful  that  the  Lord  found  it  necessary  to  visit 
him  and  declare,  “Do  not  be  afraid  any  longer,  but  go  on  speaking  and  do 
not be silent; for I am with you, and no man will attack you in order to harm 
you, for I have many people in this city” (Acts 18:9-10 
 
d.  Paul describes a present remnant, v. 5-6. 
 
“In  the  same  manner
18
  there  has  also  come  to  be,  at  the  present  [now  time],  a 
remnant  according  to  God’s  gracious  choice.”  The  word  le‹mma,  leimma,  means 
“that which is left over,” such as II Kings 19:4 where the besieged Jerusalem is a 
“remnant”  when  compared  with  the  nation  as  a  whole,  the  northern  kingdom 
having already gone into captivity.  
 
(1)  It is according to gracious election, v. 5. 
 
The  point  here  is  not  the  meager  size  of  the  present  believing  Jewish 
population, but the very sovereign origination and maintenance of this small 
Christian  community.  Now,  as  in  Elijah’s  time,  the  remnant’s  divine 
existence  is  attributed  solely  to  the  grace  of  God.  This  being  so,  and  with 
support from  the  vehement  denial  of  v.  1,  then  implicit  is  the  certain  future 
of national Israel since it is ultimately dependent upon this same elective will. 
Hence  the  divine  purpose,  according  to  unconditional  covenant  promise,  is 
bound to triumph over those who are “a disobedient and obstinate people,” 
11:21.  Such  an  accomplishment  is  described  by  Ezekiel  as  follows:  “I  will 
sprinkle clean water upon you, . . . I will give you a new heart, . . . I will put 
                                              
17
  Louis Ginzberg, Legends Of The Bible, p. 588. 
18
  The use of oÛtwj, houto¯ s meaning “in the same manner” or “even so” should be noted in view of its disputed 
meaning  in  v.  26.  Here  there  is  an  obvious  temporal  association  concerning  the  past  era  of  Elijah  and  the 
“now time.”   
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  318
My Spirit within you and cause you to walk in My statutes, . . . I will cause 
breath to enter you that you may come to life” (Ezek. 36:25-27; 37:5). 
 
(2)  It is exclusive of law works, v. 6. 
 
Here,  with  regard  to  the  past  and  present  remnant,  conditionality  is  not  a 
factor,  and  therefore  it  will  not  be  a  factor  when  the  “transgressing” 
multitude  comes  to    “fulfillment”  v.  12.  As  Haldane  comments,  “It  was  an 
unconditional choice, resulting from the sovereign free favor of God.”
19
 Faith 
here is not eliminated, nor is it elevated, but rather subordinated to the pure 
grace of God. And the pure grace of God must eliminate works of any sort, 
but especially the thought of a little worthiness or gratitude from unbelieving 
Israel. 
From a broader perspective, it is abundantly plain that for Paul both Jew and 
Gentile, individually and collectively, are saved according to God’s gracious 
election  that  will  not  admit  of  human  works  in  the  most  absolute  terms.  
Grace,  which  for  Paul  becomes  here  a  synonymous  term  for  election,  and 
works are mutually exclusive. Again, means of grace are not eliminated, but 
neither  are  they  elevated  to  a  point  where  man  retains  the  initiative  over 
God.  Here  we  are  faced  with  the  question  as  to  whether  the  dominion  of 
grace,  the  reign  of  grace  will  rise  above  the  paralysis  of  sin  that  is  so 
embodied  in  the  nation  of  Israel  as  a  whole.  Such  recalcitrance  is  further 
described in vs. 7-10 that raises the inevitable question of v. 11.    
 
2.  The proof of hardening in Israel, vs. 7-10. 
 
These  verses  appear  to  recall  the  teaching  of  9:18-24  that  expounded  upon  God’s 
hardening  of  Israel  on  account  of  its  obdurate  heart;  the  purpose  of  this  reemphasis  
concerns  the  need  of  maintaining  a  focus  on  God  as  being  in  full  control  of  Israel’s 
ultimate destiny. Further, such a reminder, in conjunction with the ensuing prospect of 
national salvation, will only enhance the purity of grace that v. 6 has delineated.  
 
a.  The hardened nation of Israel according to Paul, v. 7. 
 
We expand in translation: “Then what is the meaning of national Israel’s ongoing 
state of unbelief in the light of the present remnant that exists solely on the basis 
of  grace?  Certainly  in  Israel’s  present  zealous  seeking  of  the  law-principle  of 
righteousness  [9:31;  10:2-3]  it  has  not  attained  that  which  it  aspired  to  achieve. 
However the elect remnant did attain to the faith-principle of righteousness while 
the  rest  of  the  nation  became  hardened  according  to  God’s  just  intervention.” 
Here  Paul,  from  personal  experience,  clearly  distinguishes  between  the  nation  of 
Israel  as  a  whole  and  its  components  that  comprise  the  elect  remnant  and  the 
hardened remainder. And it is this larger part that he now emphatically describes 
as  presently  abandoned  by  God;  yet  the  stage  is  at  the  same  time  being  set  for 
explaining the ultimate triumph of sovereign  grace over “the rest,” as well as “the 
remnant,”  when  God  “will  remove  ungodliness  from  Jacob,”  v.  26.  How  often 
Paul must have reflected upon, in his volatile Jewish opponents, that hardness of 
                                              
19
  Haldane, Romans, p. 534. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  319
heart  which  he  formerly  manifested.  But  then  he  would  also  have  mused  that  if 
sovereign  grace  could  save  him,  the  chief  of  sinners,  then  there  was  similar  hope 
for the nation of Israel as a general whole. 
 
b.  The hardened nation of Israel according to the Old Testament, vs. 8-10. 
 
This montage of Scripture quotations incorporates the three major divisions of the 
Old Testament, the law, the prophets, and the writings,
20
 and thus establishes the 
punishment of divine hardening with comprehensive authority.  
 
(1)  The testimony of the law, Deuteronomy 29:4; v. 8a. 
 
Emphasis  on  the  divine  imposition  of  hardening  upon  Israel  is  indicated  by 
Paul’s turning of the negative, “the LORD has not given you a heart to know, 
nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear,” into the positive, “God gave them . . . eyes 
to see not and ears to hear not.” Even just prior to crossing the Jordan into 
the promised land, there is recollection of Israel’s continuing dullness   
 
(2)  The testimony of the prophets, Isaiah 29:10; v. 8b. 
Here the words “a spirit of deep sleep” are injected into Deuteronomy 29:4 
and  become  “a  spirit  of  stupor.”  Again,  it  is  God  who  has  appointed  this 
comprehensive  spiritual  coma  that  includes  the  prophets;  in  particular  there 
will  be  a  national  blindness  to  the  Word  of  God  (Isa.  29:10-12).  However 
what  God  imposes  in  judgment  is  a  result  of  accountable  sinfulness  so  that 
the preceding v. 9 declares, “Blind yourselves and be blind.”  
 
(3)  The testimony of the writings, Psalm 69:22-23; vs. 9-10. 
 
In  this  psalm  as  a  whole,  quoted  in  the  N.T.  with  reference  to  Christ’s 
sufferings,  David  is  deeply  distressed  on  account  of  the  assaults  of  his 
enemies.  The  fact  that  David  laments,  “I  have  become  estranged  from  my 
brothers and an alien to my mother’s sons. . . . Those who sit in the gate talk 
about  me,  and  I  am  the  son  of  the  drunkards,”  vs.  8,  12,  indicates  that  his 
opposition is from “the rest” of the nation in general while he identifies with 
the  faithful  “remnant.”  Thus  for  Paul  this  prayer  to  God  was  answered  in 
that the  requested judgment became a fact of history. Note that these verses, 
describing, as Paul puts it: “Let their eyes be darkened to see not, and bend 
their backs forever,” v. 10, immediately follow the Messianic reference of Ps. 
69:20-27,  cf.  Matt.  27:34,  38.  Thus  the  imagery  of  a  “table  becoming  a 
snare,” of “eyes being darkened,” of “backs being bent,” strongly suggests a 
divine  subjection  to  suffering  and  humiliation  that  history  has  all  to  clearly 
demonstrated. Consequently we are poised at a most crucial point since this 
terrible  divine  consignment  raises  the  inevitable  question  that  was  earlier 
raised in 9:6: “But it is not as though the Word of God has failed. For they 
are not all Israel who are descended from Israel.” Of course there the point 
was  that  a  godly  remnant  remained  within  national  Israel.  But  now  we  are  
                                              
20
  Moo, Romans, p. 681. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  320
concerned  about  the  unbelieving  “rest”  of  the  nation.  Has  God  abandoned 
the larger part of the nation forever? Romans 11:11-32 addresses this point. 
 
B.  Israel’s stumbling at Christ is temporary, vs. 11-24. 
 
The  preceding  stark  definition  of  Israel’s  blindness,  even  as  the  church  at  Rome  could  so 
plainly  observe,  might  lead  to  the  belief  that  the  nation  as  a  whole  had  been  finally 
abandoned  by  God.  Further  it  would  then  be  assumed  that  the  saved  Gentiles  now 
constituted  the  new  spiritual  nation  comprised  of  all  races,  including  a  Jewish  remnant.  
Sadly the early Christian church, in embracing replacement theology, did eventually come to 
this  conclusion,  and  with  tragic  consequences  for  the  Jew.
21
  Hence  Paul  most  adamantly 
rejects such a denial of the promises given to the “fathers,” 9:4-5; 11:28-29. What follows 
reveals  how  the  dark  night  of  Israel’s  present  sojourn  will  give  way  to  the  bright  day 
dawning  when,  “the  Deliverer  will  come  from  Zion,  He  will  remove  ungodliness  from 
Jacob,” v. 26. 
 
1.  God will bless the Gentiles to bless the Jews, vs. 11-15. 
 
Here  is  a  fourfold  portrayal  of  a  basic  gospel  theme,  namely  that  national  Israel, 
presently  bound  in  unbelief,  shall  achieve  salvation  through  their  being  prompted  to 
jealousy by the saving of the Gentiles and ultimately through the resurrection power of 
God,  vs.  11,  12,  13-14,  15.  For  Paul,  while  his  own  distinctive  Gentile  ministry  is 
significant  in  this  divine  saga,  yet  his  ultimate  vision  concerns  the  saving  of  Israel, 
“their fulfillment,” and “life from the dead.”  
 
a.  Portrayal one - Israel’s jealousy through Gentile salvation, v. 11. 
 
An expanded translation reads: “Therefore I raise a further critical question in the 
light of such ongoing abject unbelief [10:21]. National Israel did not trip/stumble 
and yet recover in its earthly pilgrimage so that a fatal, irrevocable fall eventually 
resulted,  did  it?  Surely  not!  No,  a  thousand  times,  no!  Bur  rather  through  their 
transgression/unbelief salvation has come to the Gentiles for the purpose that the 
Jews  be  made  jealous  [10:19].”  Simply  put,  while  Israel’s  rejection  has  not  been 
total, v. 1, now we understand that it has not been final. Thus when Jesus Christ 
declared, “the kingdom of God will be taken away from you [the nation of Israel] 
and given to a people, producing the fruit of it [the Gentiles]” (Matt. 21:43), it is 
eisegesis  to  suggest  that  this  abandonment  is  permanent.  Israel’s  “stumbling”  v. 
11,  is  “transgression”  v.  11,  is  “failure”  v.  12,  is  “rejection”  v.  15,  is  “branches 
broken  off,  .  .  .  the  rich  root  of  the  olive  tree”  v.  17,  which  is  on  account  of 
“unbelief”  v.  20,    which  must  surely  be  with  regard  to  the  rejection  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth as the Lord’s Messiah, 9:32-33.   
                                              
21
  While  the  first  century  was  dominated  by  the  Jewish  mother  church  at  Jerusalem  that  acknowledged  the 
inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  blessings  of  Abraham,  during  the  second  to  the  fourth  centuries  a  change 
evolved  so  that  by  the time  of  Constantine  the  Jews were  believed  to  have  forever  forfeited  the  blessings  of 
Abraham  that  had  now  been  inherited  by  the  Gentiles.  Refer  to  H.  Wayne  House,  “The  Church’s 
Appropriation  Of  Israel’s  Blessings,”  Israel,  The  Land  and  the  People,  ed.  H.  Wayne  House,  pp.  77-110; 
Walter Kaiser Jr., “An Assessment Of ‘Replacement Theology,’” Mishkan 21, (February 1994), pp. 9-20; Ray 
Pritz, “Replacing The Jews In Early Christian Theology,” Mishkan 21, (February 1994), pp. 21-27; Jeffrey S. 
Siker, Disinheriting The Jews, 296 pp. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  321
However,  “salvation  has  come  to  the  Gentiles”  v.  11,  which  is  “riches  for  the 
world”  v.  12,  which  is  “the  reconciliation  of  the  world”  v.  15,  which  is  “wild 
olive branches, . . . grafted into the rich root of the olive tree” vs. 17, 24, which is 
according to “God’s kindness” v. 22, which is “to make them [the Jews] jealous” 
v.  11.  In  God’s  plan,  the  Gentile  church  does  not  supercede  national  Israel,  but 
rather  is  instrumental  in  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  people  to  God.  Notice  the 
importance  of  the  purpose  clause  here,  “to  make  them  jealous.”  But  why? 
Obviously unbelieving national Israel is in mind, yet if this people has no future, 
this  is  meaningless,  even  worse,  since  it  suggests  a  divine  teasing  of  those  who 
have been abandoned! 
But  specifically,  how  are  the  Gentiles  intended  to  provoke  jealousy  amongst  the 
Jews?  The  intensive  parazhlÒw,  paraze¯ loo¯ ,  cf.  Deut.  32:21;  Rom.  10:19,  means 
zealous desire on account of acknowledged personal poverty, so that, “I will make 
them  [Jews  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan]  come  and  bow  down  at  your  feet,  and 
make  them  know  that  I  have  loved  you  [Philadelphia  Gentiles]”  (Rev.  3:9). 
Clearly  Paul  feels  a  compulsion  to  contribute  toward  this  process,  v.  13-14;  he 
must  proclaim  and  demonstrate  that  with  “a  [foolish]  nation  without 
understanding  will  I  anger  you,”  10:19,  in  a  way  similar  to  that  of  the  elder 
brother  becoming  jealous  at  the  rich  grace  being  poured  out  upon  the  repentant 
prodigal (Luke 15:25-32). Thus the Jews are to become desirous of God’s evident 
blessing  poured  out  upon  the  Gentiles,  not  that  they  might  become  Gentiles,  but 
fulfilled  Jews  under  their  covenant  head  and  Messiah.  David  Larsen  comments: 
“Christian  love,  instead  of  arrogance  [cf.  vs.  18,  21],  ought  to  foster  ‘envy  or 
jealousy’  among  the  Jews  for  what  Christians  possess  in  Christ  (Rom.  11:11). 
How  frequently  has  this  phenomenon  been  in  evidence  in  Christian  history  or 
now?”
22
 
 
b.  Portrayal two - Israel’s fulfillment through Gentile enrichment, v. 12. 
 
An expanded translation reads: “For if the transgression of national Israel leads to 
the  riches  of  gospel  mercy  being  poured  out  upon  the  world  at  large,  and  their 
faith failure results in rich grace for the Gentiles, then how much more abundant 
will  the  nation  of  Israel’s  ultimate  fulfillment  be  for  the  world.”  Paul  uses  the 
familiar a fortiori form of argument here, cf. 5:9, 10, 15, 17, from the lesser to the 
greater,  so  that  the  major  question  concerns  how  the  lesser  “faith  poverty  of 
national  Israel”  will  become  the  greater  “fulfillment”?  The  word  pl»rwma,    
plero¯ ma,  means  “full  measure”  or  “completeness”  that  can  be  understood  either 
qualitatively or quantitatively.
23
 The contrast with “the [large numbered] fullness 
of the Gentiles,” v. 25 and implicit here, strongly suggests “the prospective large 
numbered  fullness  of  the  Jews.”
24
  That  is  the  Jews  will  ultimately  experience  the 
“much  more,”  pÒswÄ   m©llon,  poso¯   mallon,  cf.  v.  24,  fulfillment,  that  is  national 
salvation  (Ezek.  37:1-28;  Hos.  3:4-5;  Zech.  8:1-8;  12:10-14;  31:1-2;  14:9-11), 
including  union  with  the  remnant,  that  transcends  the  preceding  blessing  of  the 
                                              
22
  David L. Larsen, “A Celebration of the Lord our God’s Role in the Future of Israel,” Israel, the Land and the 
People, ed. H. Wayne House, p. 319. 
23
  Moo, Romans, p. 689. 
24
  Johannes Munk, Christ and Israel, pp. 119-121, 132-136. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  322
Gentiles.  Thus  Alford  comments:  “If  then  the  disgrace  of  Israel  has  had  such  a 
blessed accompaniment, how much more a blessed a one shall Israel’s honor bring 
with it, when His own people shall once more be set as a praise in the midst of the 
earth,  and  the  glory  of  the  nations.”
25
  The  language  of  Paul  hardly  envisages  a 
mere  totality  of  the  remnant,  as  Hendriksen  suggests.
26
  Then  will  be  fulfilled  the 
words  of  Christ:  “Behold,  your  house  is  being  left  to  you  desolate!  For  I  say  to 
you, from now on you will not see Me until you say, ‘Blessed is He who comes in 
the  name  of  the  LORD’”  (Matt.  23:38-39).  As  Barrett  states:  “Paul  looks  beyond 
the advantages conferred on the Gentiles by the unbelief of Israel to the far greater 
eschatological bliss which Israel’s return will inaugurate.”
27
   
 
c.  Portrayal three - Israel’s provocation through Paul’s ministry, vs. 13-14. 
 
Aware of his enthusiasm for the glorious future rebirth of Israel, as well as most 
likely the large Gentile constituency of the church at Rome, the Apostle is careful 
not to disassociate his own distinctive calling from the present saving of Jews. In 
other words, in ministering to Gentiles, Paul constantly has evangelistic interest in 
mind for his kinsmen according to the flesh.    
 
(1)  It is glorious for Gentile ministry, v. 13. 
 
As  many  today  mischaracterize  Paul’s  calling  to  the  Gentiles  as  being 
detached  from his  former  involvement  with  Judaism,  so similar  clarification 
is  needed  for  the  Gentile  Christians  in  Rome.  “Yes,”  says  Paul,  “I  am  an 
apostle  of  Gentiles.”  But  further,  “I  boast  and  exalt  in  my  [appointed] 
ministry, even as you are its fruit; nevertheless there is a greater goal in view 
here  that  you  need  to  keep  in  mind.  There  is a  transcendent  purpose,  going 
beyond  your  salvation,  that  I  always  have  in  focus.”  Thus  he  corrects 
“Gentile  Christians  [who]  might  appeal  to  Paul  himself,  ‘the  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles,’ as further reason to disdain Jews and Jewish Christians.”
28
 
 
(2)  It is provocative in Jewish evangelism, v. 14. 
 
Expanded translation: “My Gentile ministry is fulfilled since by it I also have 
hope  that  it  might  provoke  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh  [9:3;  I  Cor. 
                                              
25
  Henry Alford, The Greek Testament, II, p. 403. 
26
  “His [Paul’s] words ‘their fullness’ pertain to the salvation not of a physical unit, ‘the people of Israel’; but of 
the sum of all Israel’s remnants.” Hendriksen, Romans, p. 368. This author is committed to the denial of any 
national  restoration  and future for  Israel;  refer  to  his  Israel and the  Bible,  63  pp.  Thus  he finds  a  difficulty 
here  using  tenuous  exegesis  in  that  the  “remnants”  hardly  reflect  the  greater  glory  of  Israel  that  Paul  so 
enthusiastically  describes  as  being  future,  vs.  17-32.  Further,  if  the  “their  transgression”  refers  to  national 
Israel, as v. 11 indicates, then surely “their fulfillment” refers to a similar and related comprehensive body of 
people, that is, national Israel. Of the same amillennial exegesis are Bavinck, The Last Things, pp. 104-107, 
and Hoekema, The Bible And The Future, pp. 142-145. Back of this opinion is an overriding presupposition 
that the Christian church has superceded the nation of Israel as the one people of God. Thus  the concept of 
the nation of Israel being saved according to Romans 11 is quite inadmissible. For further refutation of this 
interpretation, refer to v. 26.  
27
  C. K. Barrett, Romans, p. 214. 
28
  Moo, Romans, p. 691. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  323
10:18] and result in some of them being saved.” In other words, Paul desires 
that  Gentiles,  in  all  of  their  godless  paganism,  might  embrace  the  God  of 
Abraham  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  thus  stimulate  carnal  Jews  to  be 
partakers of the same rich blessing through the same means. The expression, 
“and save some of them” indicates that the carnal Jew, outside of Christ, is 
lost. But who are the “some of them”? Surely in the light of the future hope 
of national Israel’s “fullness,” v. 12, here Paul has in mind present additions 
to  the  remnant  that  are  “no  more  than  a  modest  contribution.”
29
  However, 
“[s]uch conversions of individual Jews, though few in number, are a precious 
foretoken  of  the  salvation  referred  to  in  v.  26.”
30
  Thus  for  Paul,  his  pro-
Semitic stance is unfading since “God has not rejected His people whom He 
foreknew,”  v.  2,  and  especially  because  “the  natural  branches  [will]  be 
grafted into their own olive tree,” v. 23, at a future time when “all Israel will 
be saved,” v. 26, with a glory that shall eclipse “the fullness of the Gentiles,” 
v.  25.  Here  Paul  participates  in  the  prelude,  the  theme  of  which  subsequent 
centuries have ill-maintained; but he always has in view God’s grand finale.       
 
d.  Portrayal four - Israel’s resurrection through Gentile evangelism, v. 15. 
 
The  use  again  of  the  a  fortiori  form  of  argument  returns  us  to  the  same  basic 
proposition  of  v.  12,  yet  with  added  emphasis  here  on  divine  initiative.  The 
downside  is  the  nation  of  Israel’s  “rejection,”  ¢pobol»,  apobole¯,  its  being  “cast 
away”  (cf.  Ezek.  37:11),  which  is  parallel  with  the  cause  of  this  abandonment, 
that is the “transgression” of unbelief. As a result comes “the reconciliation of the 
world,” which is parallel with “riches for the world,” certainly not universalism, 
yet “a great multitude which no one could count, from every nation and all tribes 
and peoples and tongues” (Rev. 7:9; cf. Matt. 24:14; 28:19; Acts 1:8; 2:17; Col. 
1:23).  Consequently  the  up  side  for  the  nation  of  Israel  is  “their  acceptance,” 
prÒslhmyhj,  prosle¯ mpsis,  or  “receiving,”  which  is  parallel  with  “their 
fulfillment,” which is more wonderfully described as nothing less than “life from 
the dead.” While it is grammatically possible that this last expression could refer 
to  physical  resurrection  of  the  Gentile  and/or  Jewish  world,  yet  the  ongoing 
emphasis  on  the  destiny  of  Israel  suggests  radical  national  conversion,  after  the 
manner of the language of 6:13.
31
  
Added support for the future national conversion/resurrection of Israel is found in 
Simeon’s prophecy that, “this Child [Jesus Christ in his arms] is appointed for the 
                                              
29
  Morris,  Romans,  p.  410.  Also  Moo,  Murray,  so  that  Paul  does  not  anticipate  that  he  will  usher  in  the 
“fullness.” 
30
  Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 561. 
31
  Barrett,  Cranfield,  and  Moo    support  a  literal  general  resurrection  that  climaxes  national  Israel’s  national 
conversion. However Murray provides more convincing proof that a figurative expression is used, Romans, 
II,  pp.  82-84.  Nanos  comments:  “Even  though  Paul  is  bringing  the  gospel  to  gentiles  it  is  in  the  service  of 
Israel’s eventual restoration, which will be incomparably superior to the present circumstances that have been 
benefiting the gentiles, even as life is incomparably superior to death.” The Mystery of Romans, p. 248. Even 
amillennialist Hoekema comments, “’Life from the dead’ does not refer to a literal resurrection; these words 
are  probably  used  as  a  figure  to  describe  the  happy  surprise  that  will  be  ours  when  Jews  who  have  been 
rebellious  turn  to  the  Lord,”  though  we  do  not  agree  with  his  further  comment  that,  “[t]here  is  no  need 
however to restrict this acceptance to a period of history at the end-time.” The Bible And The Future, p. 143.        
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  324
fall  and  rise  [resurrection,  ¢n£stasij,  anastasis,  of  many  in  Israel”  (Luke  2:34). 
Furthermore,  the  expression  “life  from  the  dead”  being  descriptive  of  national 
Israel’s  future  spiritual  resurrection  is  strongly  suggestive  of  Ezekiel  37:11-14 
where  the  vision  of  the  valley  of  dry  bones  is  interpreted.
32
  As  Spurgeon 
comments: “I wish never to learn the art of tearing God’s meaning out of his own 
words.  If  there  be  anything  clear  and  plain,  the  literal  sense  and  meaning  of  this 
passage [Ezekiel 37:21-22] – a meaning not to be spirited or spiritualized away – 
must be evident that both the two and the ten tribes of Israel are to be restored to 
their own land, and that a king is to rule over them.”
33
 
So Charles Simeon comments on Ezekiel 37:15-22: 
The  Jews  are  spread  in  almost  every  part  of  the  world.  Their  conversion  to  God 
being simultaneous in every country, it will attract the attention of all, and create a 
vast  sensation  through  the  whole  world.  The  victories,  too,  which  they  will  gain 
over  all  who  shall  oppose  their  establishment  in  their  own  land  will  yet  further 
demonstrate, not only that God is with them, but that there is no other God but He. 
They  will  be  struck,  as  Baal’s  worshippers  were  by  the  fire  which  descended  from 
heaven to consume Elijah’s sacrifice; and will exclaim, with wonder and amazement, 
‘The  Lord,  he  is  the  God!  The  Lord,  he  is  the  God!’  Instantly  will  multitudes,  in 
every place, ‘lay hold on the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; 
for we see that God is with you of a truth [Zech. 8:23].’ In truth, it will be a signal 
to all mankind to acknowledge Christ as their Lord and Savior; and it will ‘be as life 
from the dead’ [Rom. 11:15] to the whole world.
34
  
 
2.  God will bless the Jews through wise cultivation, vs. 16-24. 
 
Since 9:6, the overriding concern of Paul has been the vindication of God in the face of 
national  Israel’s  continuing  unbelief.  While  the  remnant  is  reassuring  in  terms  of 
proving  God’s  ongoing  covenant  investment,  11:1-5,  yet  it  does  not  fully  satisfy  with 
regard  to  God’s  original  promise  of  great  blessing  to  Abraham  that  is  repeatedly 
ratified  in  the  Old  Testament.  Hence,  while  many  a  man  quits  a  difficult  task,  the 
burden  of  Paul  is  now  to  demonstrate  God’s  resolve  in  the  saving  of  national  Israel 
(Gen. 18:14; cf. Phil. 1:6) as reflected by two Old Testament images in vs. 16-24 that 
will  stimulate  the  climactic  declaration  of  vs.  25-32.  So  that  in  spite  of  Gomer-like 
spiritual adultery (Hos. 3:1),  all of the vicissitudes of human history, the conflict of the 
centuries in which the Jew has suffered unspeakable persecution,  being “for many days 
without  king  or  prince,  without  sacrifice  or  sacred  pillar  and  without  ephod  or 
household idols” (Hos. 3:4), yet “the sons of Israel will return and seek the LORD their 
God  and  David  their  king;  and  they  will  come  trembling  to  the  LORD  and  to  His 
goodness in the last days” (Hos. 3:5).  
 
                                              
32
  See Alford, The Greek Testament, II, p. 404, and John Gill who both make this same association. 
33
  C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, No. 582, pp. 536-37. W. J. Grier declares, in commenting 
on this chapter, that “[w]hen Ezekiel speaks of the people being restored to their own land, he gives us clear 
hints that we are not to take this literally.” The Momentous Event, p. 35. However, when the literal meaning 
of  Ezekiel  36  becomes  an  indisputable  necessity  concerning  “the  house  of  Israel”  and  “the  land”  and  “the 
scattering,”  cf.  vs.  16-20,  24-28,  33-36,  the  suggestion  that  Ezekiel  37  describes  not  Israel  restored  to  the 
land, but believers collectively who inhabit a heavenly paradise, is hermeneutical schizophrenia. 
34
  Charles Simeon, Horæ Homileticæ, IX, p. 474.  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  325
a.  The analogy of Israel as a lump of dough, v. 16a. 
 
Translation: “So if the firstfruit [¢parc», aparche¯] is holy, the lump is also holy.” 
The “firstfruit” is described in Numbers 15:17-21 as the offering of a cake made 
from  the  first  grain  obtained  from  the  threshing  floor  in  celebration  of  entering 
the land of promised abundance. Thus the consecration of this first production of 
dough meant that the whole remaining lump, the produce to follow, was likewise 
consecrated,  as  Leviticus  6:14-18  well  indicates.  The  “firstfruit”  represents  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  or  partriarchs
35
  while  the  “lump”  is  the  resultant  Jewish 
nation,  even  as  there  is  a  parallel  with  the  “the  root”  and  “the  branches”  of  the 
olive  tree  as  is  immediately  described.  Hence  the  “sanctification”  of  Abraham 
guaranteed  the  “sanctification”  of  the  resultant  nation,  discipline  and  exile 
notwithstanding.  Haldane  puts  it  this  way:  “[A]s  the  lump  is  holy,  through  the 
offering of the first-fruits, so this is a pledge that the lump, or body of the nation, 
will yet be made holy.”
36
   
 
b.  The analogy of Israel as natural olive branches, vs. 16b-24. 
 
This  section  is  dominated  by  Paul’s  expansion  of  the  olive  tree  analogy.  He 
intends  to  provide  his  most  compelling  reasons  as  to  why  national  Israel  has 
glorious  prospects  in  spite  of  ongoing  obstinacy  in  unbelief  and  dispersal  in  the 
face  of  Gentile  dominion.  In  a  word,  the  reason  is  “grace”  through  sovereign 
promise  (4:13-16;  9:8).  However,  while  this  Gentile  dominance  continues,  such 
privilege  for  saved  barbarians  should  stimulate  humble  gratitude  and  loving 
respect for the severed natural branches rather than arrogance and conceit.  
 
(1)  The biblical  analogy introduced, v. 16b. 
 
The olive tree is symbolic of national Israel in the Old Testament, especially 
insofar as the members are branches united by one root and trunk, both with 
regard  to  rebellion  (Jer.  11:16-17)  and  restoration  (Hos.  14:4-6).  This 
individual/corporate unity is similarly reflected by rocks hewn from a quarry 
(Isa. 51:1-2), and a holy seed that will sprout from the stump of an oak tree 
hewn  down  in  judgment  (Isa.  6:13).  This  leads  us  to  the  widely  held  belief 
that  the  “root”  here  is  the  patriarchs,  and  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in 
particular, which grows natural branches, Jews, and engrafts wild branches, 
Gentiles.
37
  Further,  not  only  is  the  headship  of  Abraham  through  promise 
emphasized  in  4:1,  11-13,  16-17,  but  11:28  especially  accentuates  the  fact 
that Israel’s temporary abandonment is eclipsed by the nation being “beloved 
                                              
35
  This is the most common understanding which is derived from the more specific parallel of the analogy of the 
fig tree that follows.  
36
  Haldane, Romans, p. 544. 
37
  Alford,  Bruce,  Calvin,  Haldane,  Hendriksen,  Hodge,  Moo,  Morris,  Moule,  Munck,  Murray,  Shedd,  Stott. 
There are two other interpretations of the olive tree representation. First, the root is Christ who engrafts both 
Jew and Gentile, yet even Messiah is of the seed of Abraham (Matt. 1:1; Gal. 3:16). Paul still claims to be “an 
Israelite,  a  descendant of  Abraham,” 11:1,  cf.  v.  28, and  this  is  his present  mindset.  Second,  the  root  is the 
remnant  of  Jewish  Christians,  but  this  is  unlikely  since  they  are  the  remaining  natural  branches,  v.  17. 
Furthermore, as Hodge points out, “[t]he Gentile Christians are not said (v. 17) to be grafted into the stock 
of the converted Jews, but as branches with them they are united to a common stock.” Romans, p. 367.  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  326
for  the  sake  of  the  fathers.”  Thus  Murray  comments:  “This  fact  of 
consecration derived from the patriarchs is introduced here by the apostle as 
support  for  the  ultimate  recovery  of  Israel.  There  cannot  be  irremediable 
rejection  of  Israel;  the  holiness  of  theocratic  consecration  is  not  abolished 
and  will  one  day  be  vindicated  in  Israel’s  fullness  and  restoration.”
38
  Surely 
this is the intent of Paul here in his emphasis upon the inevitable holiness of 
the  branches.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  prospective  olive  tree  that  shall  be 
luxuriant in glory and splendor because of the Divine Orchardist/Cultivator. 
 
(2)  The ingrafting of the Gentiles, vs. 17-22. 
 
Most  likely  Paul  has  in  mind  some  Christians  in  Rome  who  have  assumed 
that  Gentile  favor  in  the  sight  of  God  is  elevation  that  has  permanently 
replaced the nation of Israel, v. 19. The whole tenor of vs. 17-22 is warning 
to  the  Gentiles  against  vain  presumption  in  this  regard  since  they  remain 
dependent upon the “root,” v. 18. 
 
(a)  Wild branches replace natural branches, v. 17. 
 
The  severing  of  “some  of  the  [natural]  branches,”  indeed  a  high 
proportion  of  the  branches  (Isa.  6:13),  portrays  severe  pruning  by  the 
Divine  Orchardist/Cultivator  due  to  fruitlessness  (Matt.  3:7-10;  21:43; 
23:38). Such destitution is the problem of Romans 9-11. 
However,  to  magnify  the  grace  extended  to  the  Gentiles  that  ought  to 
admit of no boasting, they are pictured as limbs of “a wild olive tree,” 
that  is  “Greeks  and  barbarians,”  1:14,  “a  nation  without 
understanding,”  10:19,  that  are  “grafted  contrary  to  nature  into  a 
cultivated olive tree, v. 24; they are commoners married to royalty. To 
graft  the  natural  into  the  wild  was  a  known  practice,  whereas  Paul 
describes  the  reverse  procedure.  C.  H.  Dodd’s  objection  that  here  Paul 
exhibits  the  horticultural  “limitations  of  a  town-bred  man,”  has  been 
adequately  answered  by  William  Ramsay.
39
  However,  the  point  here  is 
that the wild branches are engrafted so as to receive rather than provide 
benefit,  v.  18,  specifically  “the  rich  root  of  the  olive  tree,”  that  is 
“fatness,”  piÒthj,  piote¯s.  Surely  this  lavish  spiritual  nourish-  ment  is 
that promised through Abraham who was told by God: “In you all the 
families  of  the  earth  will  be  blessed”  (Gen.  12:3).  Here  we  are 
introduced to the vital point that the Church is not a new creation that 
has supplanted Israel, but rather a derivative of the same stock of Israel, 
that is Abraham.
40
   
                                              
38
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 85. 
39
  C. H. Dodd, Romans, p. 180. Ramsay, quoted by Munck, Christ & Israel, pp. 128-130, cites instances where 
the  grafting  of  an  uncultivated  shoot  into  a  fruitless  cultivated  tree  is  able  to  stimulate  regeneration  and 
fruitfulness. 
40
  Walter Kaiser well addresses this issue as follows. “The most basic problem [with the major concepts of the 
relation  between  Israel  and  the  Church]  is  that  each  begins  with  the  church  and  then  considers  Israel  from 
within  the  church,  trying  to  fit  the  Jews  within  this  framework.  Each  of  these  .  .  .  [concepts]  .  .  .  fails  to 
reckon with one or more of the following three primary assertions of Scripture:  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  327
(b)  Wild branches receive needed advice, vs. 18-22. 
 
The  dominant  issue  that  now  concerns  Paul  is  not  the  attitude  of  the 
Gentiles  toward  the  grace  of  their  engrafting  so  much  as  their  attitude 
mainly toward the severed limbs of national Israel, v. 19, although the 
remnant  later  represented  in  14:1-15:13,  most  likely  as  the  “weak,” 
cannot be excluded.  
 
1)  Shun arrogance before God, 18-19. 
 
The  “arrogance”  of  the  Gentiles  is  katakauc£omai, 
katakauchaomai,  an  intensive  form  of  “to  boast,”  or  “to  proudly 
declare,”  or  “to  assert  superiority  over,”  hence  “to  be  arrogant 
against  [the  Jews]  with  proud  zeal.”  As  the  Jews  had  earlier  been 
warned about a distorted appreciation of their election (Deut. 7:7-
8), so the Gentiles need a similar exhortation. 
 
a)  Arrogance toward the broken branches, v. 18. 
 
Moo  comments  that,  “Gentile  believers  were  apparently 
convinced  that  they  belonged  to  a  new  people  of  God  that 
had  simply replaced  Israel,”
41
  and  consequently  their  derisive 
attitude  was  showing.  Haldane  adds  that  here  is  well 
described,  “the  [overbearing]  spirit  that  has  long  prevailed 
among  the  Gentiles  who  profess  Christianity.  What 
marvelous  ignorance,  folly,  and  vanity,  are  often  displayed 
even  in  God’s  people!”
42
  However,  while  Israel  is  under 
discipline in the Lord’s woodshed, Gentiles are to show them 
loving respect, even if the task is at times frustrating, though 
church history does not reflect a good record.
43
 On the other 
hand  the  attitude  of  Paul,  already  considered  in  the 
introduction to Romans 9, becomes a model in terms of what 
is  here  commended.  One  scholar  of  this  shameful  period 
declares:  
                                                                                                                                                          
1.  The church is grafted into Israel, not Israel into the church. 
2.  The new covenant of Jeremiah 31:31-34 was made with “the house of Judah and the house of Israel,” not 
with the church. It is not a covenant made with all humanity, but all humanity may be grafted into it. 
3.  God has had a faithful remnant ever since the beginning of the human race. The church is that portion of 
the  faithful  remnant  that  was  called  out  of  the  Gentiles,  since  Pentecost,  to  be  grafted  into  the  faithful 
remnant  in  Israel.  There  is  a  distinction  between  Israel  and  the  church,  but  not  a  separation;  there  is  a 
oneness in which distinguishable aspects of that oneness may be seen without implying or necessitating a 
division  of  identity  or  destiny.”  “An  Epangelical  Response,”  Dispensationalism,  Israel  and  the  Church, 
eds. Blaising and Bock, pp. 360-361. Further read pp. 367-369. 
41
  Moo, Romans, p. 704. 
42
  Haldane, Romans, p. 546. 
43
  A study of church history regarding the treatment of the Jews by Christians is vital at this point. Refer to Paul 
E. Grosser and Edwin Halperin, The Causes And Effects Of Anti-Semitism; David L. Larsen, Jews, Gentiles, 
And The Church; David Rausch, A Legacy Of Hatred; Clark M. Williamson, Has God Rejected His People? 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  328
The Holocaust was, of course, the bitter fruit of long centuries 
of Christian teaching about the Jewish people. From the time 
of the gentile Church Fathers and the legal establishment of a 
triumphant  ecclesiastical  and  philosophical  control  system 
with  Constantine  the  Great,  Christendom  treated  the  Jewish 
people with contempt and taught contemptuously of them. . . 
. [T]he baptized gentiles succumbed to that wrong-headedness 
against  which  Paul  had  warned:  they  turned  in  jealousy  and 
envy against the very root that bore them (Rom. 11:18).
44
 
Surely  the  Gentile,  in  not  being  arrogant,  in  “continuing  in 
the kindness of God,” v. 22, is to allow grace received to be a 
stimulant  of  graciousness  that  is  to  be  directed  toward  the 
unbelieving Jews, and thus promote jealousy, vs. 11, 14. It is 
well  worth  contemplating  here  how  a  Christian,  whose 
eschatological system denies the existence of Jews in the sight 
of God since 70 AD, can adequately respond here in parallel 
with Paul. 
The role of the Christian church in relation to the Abrahamic 
covenant  is  significant  and  humbling  here  since,  contrary  to 
popular  opinion  down  the  centuries,  it  originates  out  of 
Judaism  and  does  not  replace  it.  Here  is  the  heart  of  the 
“mystery which for ages has been hidden in God” (Eph. 3:8-
10;  cf.  Rom.  15:8-12;  Eph2:11-13,  19;  3:6;  Col.  1:25-27), 
namely  the  engrafting  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  stock  of 
Abraham.  Amidst  all  of  the  illustrious  saints  of  the  Bible, 
including  Adam,  Noah,  Moses,  Elijah,  John  the  Baptist,  and 
the  Apostles,  Abraham  rises  above  them  all  in  both  the  Old 
and New Testaments because of the singular call of God and 
his response of faith (Gen. 15:6-7).  
 
b)  Arrogance toward Gentile ingrafting, v. 19. 
 
“Therefore  you  [the  Gentile]  will  say,”  leads  to  a 
representation  of  proud  self-importance:  “But  some  [natural 
Jewish]  branches  were  cut  off  for  the  purpose  that  I  [even  I 
the  more  evidently  worthy  Gentile]  might  exclusively  be 
engrafted  into  the stock  of  privileged  blessing  in  Abraham].” 
In  view  of  the  humble  reminder  of  v.  18,  the  Gentile  is  now 
perceived  as  accepting  his  roots  and  yet  still  boasting  in  his 
replacement of the Jew. Paul did not write in vain here, as the 
shameful  history  of  the  main  stream  of  thought  issuing  from 
the church fathers indicates. As Grosser and Halperin explain, 
Hilary,  Chrysostom,  Ambrose,  Jerome,  Cyril,  Augustine,  etc. 
are, 
                                              
44
 Forward  by  Franklin  H.  Little,  Chairman,  Department  of  Religion,  Temple  University.  Paul  E.  Grosser  and 
Edwin G. Halperin, The Causes And Effects Of Anti-Semitism, p. xii. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  329
not  bishops  and  fanatical  monks  or  mendicant 
preachers,  they  are  the  Fathers  and  Doctors  of  the 
Church.  .  .  .  Their  anti-Semitism  just  as  their  other 
writings  had  widespread  profound  and  lasting  impact. 
They  bestowed  a  sanctity  and  respectability  on  anti-
Semitism that survived the struggle between Judaism and 
Christianity of their times.
45
 
 
2)  Seek fear before God, vs. 20-21. 
 
When Christians turn, ever so slightly, away from God, and focus 
upon  their  condition  relative  to  others,  there  is  the  inevitable 
temptation  to  exude  Pharisaic  pride  (Luke  18:11).  So  in  Church 
history  the  Gentiles  have  frequently  despised  the  Jews  and 
sanctimoniously  accused  them  of  being  “Christ-killers,”  as  if  they 
were  far  less  guilty  (Acts  4:27).  Chrysostom    declared:  “The  Jews 
are  the  most  worthless  of  all  men.  They  are  lecherous,  greedy, 
rapacious. They are perfidious murderers of Christ. They worship 
the  devil,  their  religion  is  a  sickness.  The  Jews  are  the  odious 
assassins  of  Christ  and  for  killing  God  there  is  no  expiation 
possible, no indulgence or pardon.”
46
 
 
a)  Fear God’s dealing with the Jews, v. 20. 
 
By way of expanded translation: “In the main it is true what 
you  say.  The  greater  proportion  of  Israelites  were  faithless 
and  consequently  broken  off  from  the  olive  tree.  However, 
you  are  to  stand  upon  faith  that  hopes  in  mercy  rather  than 
self-congratulatory  posturing.  Do  not  place  yourself  on  a 
pedestal  by  having  a  high  opinion  of  yourself,  but  rather 
fearfully  consider  your  own  status  before  God.”  As  Israel’s 
fundamental  sin  was  “unbelief,”  3:3;  9:32;  11:31;  15:31,  so 
the Gentile is warned about proudly claiming immunity. 
 
b)  Fear God’s dealing with the Gentiles, v. 21. 
 
While God is partial in His elective purposes, He is impartial 
insofar  as  the  requirement  of  faith  is  concerned.  Hence 
faithlessness  in  Israel  resulted  in  severance  so  that 
faithlessness  amongst  the  Gentiles  can  expect  identical 
discipline.  Haldane  adds  that  this  warning,  “appears  to  be  a 
prophetical  intimation  of  the  apostasy  of  the  great  body  of 
the professors of Christianity under the mystery of iniquity.”
47
 
In  other  words,  the  fullness  of  blessing  for  the  Gentiles  will 
                                              
45
  Grosser and Halperin, The Causes And Effects Of Antisemitism: The Dimensions Of Prejudice, pp. 78-81. 
46
  Ibid., p. 78. 
47
  Haldane, Romans, p. 547. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  330
end  in  apostasy  while  the  apostasy  of  Israel  will  end  in 
fullness of blessing, cf. vs. 22-26. 
 
3)  Sustain gratitude before God, v. 22. 
 
Paul  contemplates  how  God’s  dealings  with  both  Jew  and  Gentile 
should  cause  us  to  ponder  the  polarity  of  His  justice  which  is 
differently  viewed  according  to  the  perspective  of  either  faith  or 
faithlessness.  Both  “goodness”  crhstÒthj,  chre¯stote¯s,  cf.  2:4,  and 
“severity” ¢potom…a, apotomia, cf. 1:18, were manifest to Jew and 
Gentile,  and  comprise  aspects  of  God’s  righteousness,  that  is  His 
judging  and  justifying  righteousness  that  originate  in  the  Old 
Testament (Ps. 85:10; Hab. 3:2; Is. 46:12-13) and culminate in the 
righteous  Christ  becoming  the  believing  sinner’s  righteousness 
(Rom. 3:26; I Cor. 1:30; I John 1:9). 
Thus, up to the present, faithlessness amongst the Jews has resulted 
in  severity, while  faithfulness  amongst the  Gentiles  has  resulted  in 
goodness.  But  regarding  the  future,  if  the  Gentiles  persevere  in 
faith  there  will  be  ongoing  goodness  from  God,  though  if  they 
become faithless there will be severity poured out upon them even 
as the Jews have experienced. Thus Paul stresses the responsibility 
of the Gentiles in Rome lest they presume upon the sovereignty of 
God,  though  the  conditional  “if”  clause  here  expresses  probable 
fulfillment. 
 
(3)  The engrafting of the Jews, vs. 23-24. 
 
As  the  olive  tree  analogy  commenced  with  reference  to  Israel,  and  then 
focused on necessary warning for the Gentiles, so now we revert to the major 
concern  of  Israel’s  future  destiny,  that  is  the  unbelieving  nation  as  a  whole 
apart from the remnant. 
 
(a)  The Jews can yet be engrafted, v. 23. 
 
“And  they  [the  unbelieving  nation],  if  they  do  not  continue  [same 
present tense of ™pimšnw, epimeno¯ , as in v. 22] in unbelief,” is the same 
type  of  third  class  conditional  sentence  expressing  probable  fulfillment 
as  was  in  v.  22.
48
  Hence,  whatever  conditionality  is  valid  for  Israel  is 
equally  valid  for  the  Gentiles,  though  God’s  underlying  elective 
purposes are also equally valid and will not fail.
49
 Thus the probability 
is that “they [unbelieving Israel as a nation, not the remnant, cf. vs. 19-
22] will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.” Humanly 
speaking, Israel’s condition is hopeless, even as is the case with any lost 
                                              
48
  Refer  to  A.  T.  Robertson,  Word  Pictures  in  the  New  Testament,  IV,  p.  397,  also  Dana  and  Mantey,  A 
Manual Grammar of the Greek New Testament, pp. 289-90. 
49
  It is astonishing to read the Calvinistic amillenialists who at this point emphasize conditionality whereas, in 
elsewhere  vigorously  upholding  unconditional  election  especially  with  regard  to  the  Gentiles,  they  are 
emphatic concerning the gift of faith and the perseverance of the saints. So Hendriksen, Romans, p. 375. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  331
sinner or backslidden believer. However, “God is able to graft them [the 
unbelieving  nation  of  Israel]  in  again  [into  the  olive  tree  and  root  of 
Abraham].”  That  is,  He  has  the  sovereign  power  and  covenant 
commitment whereby Israel as a nation can indeed be saved. 
Haldane comments: “He [God] is able to make the dry bones live [Ezek. 
37:1-14],  and  to  restore  the  severed  branches  of  the  Jewish  nation.”
50
 
Here  then  is  Paul’s  implicit  denial  that  national  Israel  has  been 
irrevocably cast aside, otherwise such a comment would be out of place. 
If  God  has  previously  determined  that  Israel  has  been  permanently 
rejected  as  a  nation,  surely  Paul  would  not  imply  the  opposite  in 
declaring that “God is able [has the power]” to save them,” unless His 
power could not rise to conquer their unwillingness!  
 
(b)  The Jews can lay claim to being engrafted, v. 24. 
 
This  afortiori  argument,  from  the  lesser  to  the  greater,  seemingly 
injected  to  accentuate  the  truth  of  God’s  saving  power  in  v.  23,  also 
introduces  a  glorious  prospect  that  will  now  be  developed  and  reach  a 
climax in vs. 26-27. Thus: “If you Gentiles were broken off from a wild 
olive tree and unnaturally grafted into a cultivated olive tree, then how 
much  more  is  it  likely  that  those  severed  natural  branches  [that  is  the 
nation  as  a  whole]  will  be  grafted  back  into  their  own  olive  tree?” 
Simply  put,  the  Jews  will  not  lose  their  national  identity  but  rather 
return  home  from  whence  they  came,  that  is  the  root  of  Abraham. 
Further,  the  apodasis  suggests  something  even  more  glorious  than  that 
which the fullness of the Gentiles conveys. It is a future hope expressed 
with the future tense of ™nkentr…zw, enkentrizo¯ , meaning to engraft. For 
this  reason  Paul  here  could  not  merely  be  referring  to  the  remnant 
within  Israel  which  has  been  engrafted  on  an  ongoing  basis;  such  a 
conclusion  would  be  anticlimactic  in  the  argument  here  whereas  Paul 
anticipates something climactically, transcendently  wonderful.  
Thus Moo concludes concerning this exhortation for the Gentiles:  
The  picture  Paul  sketches  reveals  the  danger  of  the  simple  and  popular 
notion  that  the  church  has  ‘replaced’  Israel.  For  this  formula  misses  the 
stress  Paul  places  on  historical  continuity  in  the  people  of  God.  Paul 
suggests  that  the  church,  defined  as  the  entire  body  of  believers  in  Jesus 
Christ, is simply the name for the people of God in this era of salvation 
history as ‘Israel’ was the name of that people in the previous age. To 
be  sure,  the  dual  nature  of  OT  Israelboth  spiritual  and  national 
complicates  the  matter,  but  in  neither  sense  does  the  church  simply 
‘replace’ Israel. As a spiritual entity, Israel is organically connected to the 
church;  and  as  a  national  entity,  as  Paul  has  made  clear  (11:1-2),  Israel 
continues to exist as the object of God’s care and attention. 
What  is  particularly  pernicious  in  the  ‘replacement’  model  is  the 
assumption so easily made that ‘church’ = Gentiles. This assumption was 
apparently  beginning  to  be  made  by  Paul’s  contemporaries.  And  it  has 
                                              
50
  Haldane, Romans, p. 548. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  332
certainly  been  embraced  by  many  Christians  throughout  history, 
contributing  (albeit  often  inadvertently)  to  anti-Semitism  that  has  too 
often  stained  the  name  of  Christ.  .  .  .  The  coming  of  Christ  did  not  for 
him  [Paul]  involve  ethnic  subtraction,  as  if  Jews  were  now  eliminated, 
but  addition,  with  Gentiles  now  being  added  to  believing  Jews.  Paul’s 
boundary  for  the  people  of  God  is  a  religious  onefaith  in  Jesus 
Christnot  an  ethnic  one.  We  must  not  become  so  focused  on  the 
theology  of  Paul’s  teaching  here  that  we  miss  its  purpose:  to  criticize 
those  of  us  who  are  Gentiles  for  arrogance  toward  believing  and 
unbelieving  Jews  and  to  remind  us  that  our  own  spiritual  heritage  is  a 
Jewish one.
51
 
 
C.  Israel’s hardening in unbelief is impermanent, vs. 25-32.  
 
Since the beginning of Romans 9, the overriding concern of Paul has been the justification of 
God  in  His  covenant  dealings  with  the  nation  of  Israel.  Now  a  climactic  thrust  is  reached 
that  seals  the  dogmatic  assertions  of  11:1,  11.  The  emphasis  upon  the  nation  as  a  whole 
continues  in  large  focus,  especially  since  for  Paul  the  Old  Testament  manifestation  has 
ongoing New Testament significance. The evidence for this is best grasped by reviewing the 
eleven  references  to  “Israel”  in  Romans  9-11,  thus  far  in  9:6,  27,  31;  10:19,  21;  11:2,  7, 
here  also  in  v.  25,  and  yet  again  in  v.  26;  in  these  the  nation  is  always  in  view.  Even  the 
concept  of  the  lesser  remnant  mirrors  the  remaining  greater  unbelieving  portion  that 
together comprise the nation of Israel as a whole, which is the exact meaning in verse 26. 
 
1.  The hardening of Israel will conclude, v. 25. 
 
It  is  common  for  a  too  hasty  attitude  to  focus  on  v.  26  because  of  its  prophetic 
significance  without  giving  sufficient  weight  to  the  preceding  context.  The  reason  for 
such  intense  and  often  impatient  interest  is  that  the  major  millennial  schools  of 
eschatology  set  their  sails  according  to  the  place  of  Israel  in  their  distinctive  schemes. 
So  Horatius  Bonar  writes:  “[T]he  prophecies  concerning  Israel  are  the  key  to  all  the 
rest.  True  principles  of  interpretation,  in  regard  to  them,  will  aid  us  in  disentangling 
and illustrating all prophecy together. False principles as to them will most thoroughly 
perplex  and  overcloud  the  whole  Word  of  God.”
52
  Even  now  it  is  vital  to  carefully 
study v. 25 since it really establishes the course of v. 26. 
 
a.  The exhortation of the brethren. 
 
“For I do not want you to be ignorant/uninformed [¢gnoe‹n, agnoe¯n], brethren, of 
this  mystery,  so  that  you  will  not  be  conceited/wise  according  to  your  own 
perception.” Paul continues the thought of v. 25 concerning the greater apodosis, 
the  much  more  glorious  prospect  of  natural  branches  being  engrafted  back  into 
the root of Abraham. But who does he address with a note of reprimand? Surely it 
is  the  proud  Gentiles,  already  chastised,  lest  they  think  that  world  history  will 
climax  with  their  exaltation.  There  is  wide  agreement  at  this  point;  Moo 
                                              
51
  Moo,  Romans,  pp.  709-10.  Here,  along  with  the  brief  remark  of  Haldane  previously  noted,  is  an  honest 
encounter with the shameful historic ramifications of Paul’s teaching at this point that is uncommon amongst 
commentators. 
52
  Horatius Bonar, Prophetical Landmarks, p. 228. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  333
comments  that  Paul  “leaves  no  doubt  about  what  he  wants  his  readers  to  learn 
from  this  mystery:  to  stop  thinking  so  highly  of  themselves  in  comparison  with 
Jews (v. 25a). We who are Gentiles should likewise take these verses as a reminder 
that  we  are  only  part  of  the  great  salvation-historical  plan  of  God  and  that  that 
plan has its climax in the salvation of Israel.”
53
 They are not to act with an “elder 
brother”  attitude  (Luke  15:25-32).   Trench,  in  expounding  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son,  explains:  “[W]e  Gentiles  must  not  forget  that  at  the  end  of  the 
present dispensation all will be reversed, and that we shall be in danger of playing 
the part of the elder brother, and shall do so if we grudge at the largeness of the 
grace bestowed upon the Jew, who is now feeding upon the husks, far away from 
his Father’s house.”
54
 
 
b.  The revelation of the mystery. 
 
What  is  this  “the  mystery,”  tÕ  must»rion,  to  muste¯ rion,  which  the  Gentile 
believers  need  to  comprehend?  It  is  a  revelation  of  God,  previously  undisclosed 
during  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  that  has  now  been  made  known;  it 
especially  focuses  on  the  inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  root  of  Abraham,  as 
16:25-26 confirms, without the ultimate exclusion of national Israel (cf. Eph. 3:3-
10, which intimates revelation from Christ; Col. 1:25-27). Hence, this mystery is 
not  the  supplanting  of  Israel  by  the  Gentiles,  but  rather  the  incorporation  of  the 
Gentiles  followed  by  Israel’s  salvation,  v.  26a.  Thus  the  mystery  includes  the 
sequence of Jewish hardening, Gentile fullness, Jewish salvation. 
 
c.  The fullness of the Gentiles. 
 
What  then  is  this  “fullness  [tÕ  pl»rwma,  the  ple¯roma]  of  the  Gentiles”?  Of  vital 
importance here is v. 12 where we saw that “the riches of gospel mercy [are] being 
poured out upon the world a large” (Matt. 24:14; Acts 2:17), and this is parallel 
with  and  yet  outshone  by  the  subsequent  pl»rwma,  ple¯roma  of  gospel  blessing 
that  will  come  to  the  unbelieving  nation.  While  a  remnant  of  national  Israel  is 
presently  being  saved  during  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles,  yet  there  is  an 
anticipated  “much  more  fulfillment”  that  will  unite  and  bless  the  nation  as  a 
whole.  Luke  21:24  describes  this  same  sequence  in  world  history    when, 
“Jerusalem  will  be  trampled  under  foot  by  the  Gentiles  until  [¢cr…,  achri, 
temporal preposition indicating sequence] the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.” 
Thus  at  the  end  of  Gentile  blessing  through  the  gospel,  there  will  follow  even 
greater  fullness  of  gospel  blessing  upon  the  nation  of  Israel.  This  does  not  mean 
that no more Gentiles will be saved following this transition any more than there 
were no Jews saved before it.
55
  
Hence  pl»rwma,  ple¯roma  means,  “the  [large  numbered,  but  not  elect  totality] 
fullness of blessing” of the Gentiles when they “come in” to the kingdom of God’s 
                                              
53
  Moo, Romans, p. 713. Also Barrett, Cranfield, Haldane, Hendriksen, Hodge, Morris, Murray, Shedd. 
54
  R. C. Trench, Notes on the Parables of Our Lord, p. 152. Cranfield makes a similar comment: “The order of 
salvation  thus  described  marks  significantly  an  inversion  of  the  order  in  which  the  good  news  is  preached 
according to 1:16 (‘both for the Jew first and for the Greek’). Romans, II, p. 572. 
55
  Refer to Murray, Romans, II, pp. 91-96 for the best consideration of this whole matter.   
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  334
redeemed  people.  This  fullness  is  reflected  in  the  Parable  of  the  Great  Supper 
where the master, having been spurned by the initial invitees (Jews), instructs his 
slaves  to  give  repeated  invitations  to  the  disreputable  Gentiles:  “Go  out  into  the 
highways  and  along  the  hedges,  and  compel  them  [the  Gentiles]  to  come  in,  so 
that my house may be filled” (Luke 14: 23). 
 
d.  The partial hardening of Israel. 
 
Thus  “a  large  segment/part  of  Israel  has  become  hardened/calloused  [pèrwsij,   
po¯ ro¯ sis].” Hence  Israel  here  is  imperfectly  comprised  of  both  “the  remnant”  and 
“the  hardened  part,”  though  this  present  disjunction  will  eventually  become  a 
perfect  union  when  “all”  Israel  is  saved,  v.  26.  Such  a  radical  change  will  take 
place  in  chronological  order,  “until,”  ¢cr…,  achri,  temporal  preposition,
56
  and 
hence  following  that  time  when  “the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles  has  come  in.”  In 
other  words,  “I  will  gather  you  from  the  peoples  and  assemble  you  out  of  the 
countries  among  which  you  have  been  scattered,  and  I  will  give  you  the  land  of 
Israel. When they come there, they will remove all its detestable things and all its 
abominations from it. And I will give them one heart, and put a new spirit within 
them. And I will take the heart of stone out of their flesh and give them a heart of 
flesh,  that  they  may  walk  in  My  statutes  and  keep  my  ordinances  and  do  them. 
Then they will be My people, and I shall be their God” (Ezek. 31:17-19; cf. 36:22-
28). Then, as Spurgeon preached, “the nation of Israel . . . shall be effectually and 
permanently converted, the hearts of the fathers shall be turned with the hearts of 
the children unto the Lord their God , and they shall be the people of God, world 
without end.”
57
  
 
2.  The salvation of Israel will come from Zion, vs. 26-29. 
 
While Paul has already revealed that national Israel has a future day of glory which he 
designates  as  “their  fulfillment,”  v.  12,  “their  acceptance,”  v.  15,  their  being 
“regrafted”  into  the  olive  tree,  vs.  23-24,  their  hard-heartedness  being  ended,  v.  25, 
now  he  is  even  more  forthright  that  such  salvation  is  covenantally  inevitable  and 
climactic  in  world  history.  While  it  is  inferred  that  the  engrafting  of  the  Gentiles  is 
through the saving work of Christ, the regrafting of Israel is now explicitly declared to 
be through “the Delivering One” (cf. I Thess. 1:10). 
 
a.  The Deliverer will save national Israel, v. 26-27. 
 
The  controversy  that  surrounds  this  verse  is  closely  related  to  systems  of 
eschatology that have espoused three main perspectives. 1. “Israel” here refers to 
the  redeemed  of  the  New  Testament  era  who  comprise  the  church,  whether 
                                              
56
  Consider  the  use  by  Paul  in  1:13;  I  Cor.  11:26;  15:25;  Gal.  3:19;  4:2;  Phil.  1:6  where  a  future  change  of 
circumstances  is  envisaged.  Moo  adds,  “But  decisive  for  this  interpretation  is  the  context,  for  Paul  has 
throughout vs. 11-24 implied that Israel would one day experience a spiritual rejuvination that would extend 
far beyond the present bounds of the remnant (“their fulness” contrasted with “their defeat” in v. 12; their 
“acceptance” contrasted  with “their rejection” in v. 15; the “holiness” of even the broken-off branches in v. 
16; the hope that these branches might be grafted in again in v. 24).” Romans, pp. 717-8. 
57
  C. H. Spurgeon, “The Restoration and Conversion of the Jews,” Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, Vol. 10, p. 
538, Sermon 582.  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  335
converted  Jew  or  Gentile.  Thus  the  Christian  church  has  become  the  new  Israel 
that  has  replaced  the  former  Old  Testament  nation.  This  view  of  Calvin  has 
diminished support because of obvious exegetical weakness. 2. “Israel” here refers 
to  the  totality  of  the  saved  remnant  of  national  Israel  11:5,  that,  while  being 
comprised  of  Jewish  Christians,  yet  is  merged  with  the  church  which  is  the  new 
Israel.  Both  of  the  above  views  can  admit  to  a  larger  number  of  Jews  being 
converted  at  the  end  of  this  age,  though  without  there  being  any  national 
significance  with  regard  to  the  future.  Such  an  increase,  again,  merges  with  the 
church.  This  view  is  especially  supported  by  Dutch  and  Reformed  scholars.  3. 
“Israel” here refers to a future national conversion of Israel, the larger unbelieving 
segment  in  particular,  that  results  in  Israel  serving  under  Christ  in  the  promised 
land with restored glory. This view, with variations, is most widely held today. 
 
(1)  The national salvation of all Israel, v. 26a. 
 
The meaning of p©j 'Isra¾l, pas Israe¯ l, is the key here. The context of v. 25 
where  “Israe¯l”  must  refer  to  the  nation  as  a  whole  is  decisive,  as  is  the 
consistent  use  in  the  other  9  instances  in  Romans  9-11  that  never  refer  to 
Gentiles. The “all” incorporates the implied “remnant” and the “unbelieving 
remainder”  of  v.  25.  Thus  Murray  comments,  “that  it  is  exegetically 
impossible  to  give  to  ‘Israel’  in  this  verse  any  other  denotation  than  that 
which  belongs  to  the  term  throughout  this  chapter.”
58
  The  remnant  has  not 
been explicitly mentioned since vs. 5, 7. Again in vs. 24-25, the regrafting is 
portrayed as climactic in the future, and not periodic throughout the church 
age.
59
  If  only  the  remnant  was  in  mind  here  with  regard  to  this  age,  the 
present  tense  would  be  more  appropriate.  Rather,  “Israel  will  be  saved 
[future tense]” parallels “will be engrafted [future tense]” in v. 24. Thus, the 
meaning  of  “and  so,”  kaˆ  oÛtwj,  kai  houto¯ s  Added  support  for  the  future 
national conversion/resurrection of Israel is found in Simeon’s prophecy that, 
“this  Child  {Jesus  Christ  in  his  arms]  is  appointed  for  the  fall  and  rise  of 
many in Israel” (Luke 2:34.s, is not the operative concern here. It can mean 
“and  then”  in  a  temporal  sense,  as  Bruce  and  Barrett  uphold,
60
  or  it  can 
mean  “and  thus”  in  accord  with  the  Scripture  about  to  be  quoted,  or  most 
                                              
58
  Murray, Romans, I, p. 96. So Barrett, Boice, Cranfield, Haldane, Hodge, Lloyd-Jones, Moo, Morris, Moule, 
Stott.  Roman  Catholic  scholar  Brendan  Byrne  comments  that  equating  “all  Israel”  with  “the  totality  of 
believers, Jewish and Christian . . . is generally rejected today in favor of a reference to the whole of ethnic 
Israel,” Romans (Sacra Pagina), p. 354. However, such agreement does not necessarily imply the belief that 
national Israel will inherit the promised land of Palestine.  
59
  The suggestion that Israel here is the accumulation of the remnant over the centuries, according to Bavinck, 
Hoekema, Hendriksen, Palmer Robertson, is, according to Schreiner, “stunningly anticlimactic,” Romans, p. 
617.  Reymond  betrays  this  weakness  in  stating:  “This  view  still  allows  enough  [emphasis  added!]  Jewish 
conversions to Christianity throughout this age to meet the demand of the ‘riches’ (, ploutos, 11:12) 
and  ‘life  from  the  dead’  (zw¾  ™k  nekrîn,  zo¯ e¯   ek  nekro¯ n,  11:15)  which  Paul  envisions  ‘all  Israel’s’  salvation 
will bring to the world.” A New Systematic Theology of the Christian Faith, p. 1029. 
60
  Bruce describes “the well attested use of Gk. houto¯ s (‘so’, ‘thus’) in a temporal sense.” Romans (Tyndale), p. 
222. Barrett, Romans, p. 223.  
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  336
likely  it  means  “in  the  same  manner,”  that  is  concerning  how  the  thrust  of 
vs. 7-25 works out, which is very much time/sequence oriented.”
61
  
But more specifically, what is the nature of this future national conversion of 
Israel?  Most  likely  it  comprises  the  nation  in  general  without  absolute 
totality, as is reflected in the approximate numbering of Israel (Num. 2, 26). 
Further, it is paralleled by numerous Old Testament prophetic references that 
present  a  harmonious  picture  of  the  resurrected  nation,  v.  15,  that  has 
returned  to  its  land  and  become  the  object  of  unequalled  blessing  and 
universal  acknowledgment,  and  are  not  adequately  fulfilled  in  Israel’s  post-
exilic  blessings  (Deut.  30:1-10;  Isa.  43:1-7;  Jer.  23:3;  30:1-11;  Ezek.  11:14-
21;  20:39-44;  36:22-37:28;  39:25-29;  Hos.  1:10-11;  2:14-23;  3:4-5; 14:1-7; 
Amos  9:13-15;  Zech.  10:6-12).
62
  So  Jonathan  Edwards  describes  this 
restoration:  
Without  doubt,  they  [the  Jews]  will  return  to  their  own  land;  because  when 
their  unbelief  ceases,  their  dispersion,  the  dreadful  and  signal  punishment  of 
their  unbelief  will  cease  too.  As  they  have  continued  hitherto,  with  one 
consent, to dishonor Christ by rejecting the gospel, so shall they meet together 
to honor him, by openly professing of it with one mouth, and practice it with 
one  heart  and  one  soul,  together  lamenting  their  obstinacy,  as  it  is  said  they 
shall (Zech. 12:11-12), and together praising God for his grace in enlightening 
them.  And  as  they  have  hitherto  continued  a  distinct  nation,  that  they  might 
continue  a  visible  monument  of  his  displeasure,  for  their  rejecting  and 
crucifying  their  Messiah,  so  after  their  conversion  will  they  still  be  a  distinct 
nation,  that  they  may  be  a  visible  monument  of  God’s  wonderful  grace  and 
power in their calling and conversion. . . . But yet, we are not to imagine that 
the old walls of separation will be set up again. . . . For they shall look upon 
all the world to be their brethren, as much as the Christians in Boston  and the 
Christians in other pats of New England look on each other as brethren.
63
 
 
(2)  The national Deliverer of Jacob, v. 26b. 
 
The  salvation  of  all  Israel  is  confirmed  and  explained  in  the  Word  of  God, 
specifically Isaiah 27:9; 59:20-21a; Jer. 31:33-34, which Paul freely adapts to 
complement the revelation of the “mystery,” v. 25. Thus, “Out of Zion will 
the  Delivering  One  come.”  The  future  tense  suggests  the  return  of  Jesus 
Christ, after the manner of, “Jesus, who rescues [delivers] us from the wrath 
to come” (I Thess. 1:10; cf. 2:4, 8), having come from the heavenly Zion and 
his throne of intercession (Heb. 12:22-24); this complements the other future 
aspects  of  vs.  24,  26.  However,  Paul’s  flexible  manner  of  using  the  Old 
Testament is evident when, as distinct from the LXX declaring “the deliverer 
                                              
61
  Moo  provides  the  most  comprehensive  study  of  v.  26a  and  comments  “that  houto¯ s,  while  not  having  a 
temporal  meaning,  has  a  temporal  reference:  for  the  manner  in  which  all  Israel  is  saved  involves  a  process 
that unfolds in definite stages.” Romans, p. 720. This is the identical situation in vs. 4-5 where oÛtwj, houto¯ s 
is used in a temporal context with regard to the past concerning Elijah and the “present time.” 
62
  It  is  surprising  that  Moo,  Morris,  Murray,  but  not  Haldane,  make  no  reference  to  this  broad  canvas  and 
obvious  association,  even  though  the  following  quotations  of  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  draw  from  this  pervasive 
Old Testament theme and reflect Paul’s ongoing Jewish connection with it.  
63
  Jonathan Edwards,  Works (Yale), V, p. 135. Iain Murray indicates that many English Puritans were of this 
same opinion concerning the national conversion and restoration of Israel. The Puritan Hope, pp. 175-8. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  337
shall come for Zion’s sake” in basic agreement with the Hebrew, he uniquely 
writes that Christ shall come “out of Zion,” ™k Siën, ek Sio¯ n, and probably 
with  the  thought  in  mind  of  Psalm  14:7,  “Oh,  that  the  salvation  of  Israel 
would come out of Zion! When the LORD restores His captive people, Jacob 
will rejoice, Israel will be glad.” This is further indicated since this Delivering 
One “will remove [future tense] ungodliness from Jacob” (Isa. 27:9; cf. vs. 6, 
12-13  which,  according  to  Paul’s  reference  here,  must  transcend  the  return 
from  Babylon).  This  scene  is  repeatedly  eschatological,  and  for  this  reason 
we  reject  Lloyd-Jones’  interpretation.
64
  It  is  well  reflected  in  William 
Cowper’s poem, “Israel’s Redemption.”
65
 
On the mountain’s top appearing, 
Lo, the sacred Herald stands! 
Welcome news to Zion bearing, 
Zion long in hostile lands; 
Mourning captive, 
God Himself will loose thy bands! 
Has thy night been long and mournful? 
All thy friends unfaithful proved? 
Have thy foes been proud and scornful? 
By thy sighs and tears unmoved? 
Cease thy mourning; 
Zion still is well beloved. 
Lo, thy Sun is risen in glory! 
God himself appears thy friend; 
All thy foes shall flee before thee; 
Here their boasts and triumphs end; 
Great deliverance 
Zion’s King vouchsafes to send! 
Enemies no more shall trouble; 
All thy warfare now is past; 
For thy shame thou shalt have double; 
Days of peace are come at last: 
All thy conflicts 
End in everlasting rest. 
 
(3)  The national covenant of cleansing, v. 27. 
 
The continuing quotation of Isaiah 59:21a, now incorporating the thought of 
covenant  and  cleansing  from  Isaiah  27:9;  Jeremiah  31:31,  33-34,  indicates 
that  the  basis  of  the  aforementioned  salvation  of  Israel  will  be  the  atoning 
                                              
64
  “The  Zion  out  of  which  He  will  come  is  indeed  heaven  itself;  His  influence  will  come  from  there.  I  am  not 
saying that this is the Second Coming, I am simply saying that the Apostle is saying here that in this spiritual 
manner the Redeemer will exert this tremendous influence upon the nation of the Jews and will turn iniquity 
from  them  and  will  bring  them  to  faith  and  salvation  and  bring  them  into  membership  of  the  Christian 
church.”  Romans  11,  p.  191.  Also  note  that  in  vs.  23-4  the  Jews  are  regrafted  into  their  former  stock,  the 
olive tree or root of Abraham, not the wild olive branches. 
65
  James A. Begg, Extracts on Prophecy, pp. 343-5. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  338
“Seed"  of  Abraham.  The  “newness”  of  this  covenant  (Heb.  8:8-13;  12:18-
24)  is  in  relation  to  the  old  covenant  made  at  Mt.  Sinai,  while  it  is  but  the 
fulfillment  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  v.  28.  Cranfield  rightly  concludes 
that  such  unilateral  deliverance,  “dashes  Israel’s  self-centered  hopes  of 
establishing  a  claim  upon  God,  of  putting  Him  under  an  obligation  by  its 
merits, making it clear that the nation’s final salvation will be a matter of the 
forgiveness of its sins by the sheer mercy of its God.”
66
  
 
3.  The salvation of Israel will be comprehensive, vs. 28-32. 
 
The  whole  problem  for  the  Gentile  has  been  one  of  misplaced  focus,  that  is  self-
centeredness; the overriding purpose of Paul has been to correct this narrow vision so 
that  it  encompasses  the  broader  perspective  of  Jew  and  Gentile  in  God’s  plan  of 
redemption.  Notice  the  contrast  between  “they”  (Israelites)  and  “your”  (Gentiles),  v. 
28,  between  “you”  (Gentiles)  and  “their/these/they”  (Israelites),  vs.  30-31.  By  way  of 
concluding  summation,  Paul  now  continues  to  address  the  Gentile  in  much  the  same 
way that God needed to address the narrow focus of Peter (Acts 10:44-11:18).  
 
a.  According to irrevocable covenant, vs. 28-29. 
 
Here biblical covenantalism, with regard to God’s saving purposes, is brought to 
the forefront, and this in turn causes us to grasp that God’s gospel is rooted in His 
sovereign  will  and  commitment  rather  than  human  cooperation.  Hence  we  are 
constrained  to  view  God’s  dealings  from  His  point  of  view  rather  than  that  of 
either the Gentile or Jew, and here this calls for continued emphasis on the Gentile 
having  his  vision  expanded  even  as  this  thrust  was  introduced  at  v.  17.  The 
necessity  may  be  due  to  the  glorious  deliverance  of  vs.  26-27  that  could  easily 
arouse  Gentile  discomfort,  again  after  the  manner  of  the  “elder  brother”  (Luke 
15:25-32). 
 
(1)  The covenant incorporates God’s choice of Israel, v. 28. 
 
“On  the  one  hand,  according  to the  gospel,  they  [the Israelites]  are enemies 
for your [the Gentiles] sake, but on the other hand, according to the election, 
they  [the  Israelites]  are  beloved  for  the  sake  of  the  fathers  [the  patriarchs, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob].”  The  first  part  of  this  proposition  would  not 
surprise  the  Gentile;  he  would  gladly  accepted  that  according  to  divine 
purpose,  v.  1,  the  Jew  has  been  spurned  by  God  on  account  of    hostility  to 
Christ.  
However an overriding principle must be kept in mind being God’s covenant 
transaction  with  Abraham  that  preceded  the  revelation  of  the  mystery 
through  the  church,  namely  the  original  election  of  Israel  that  was 
irrevocable,  according  to  “foreknowledge,”  vs.  1-2  (cf.  Ps.  33:11-12;  Isa. 
44:1-2;  Amos  3:2).
67
  Deuteronomy  7:7-8  declares  that  God’s  election  of 
                                              
66
  Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 579. 
67
  Here  “the  election”  is  descriptive  of  “they”  and  thus  the  nation  rather  than  a  reference  to  the  “remnant 
according  to  God’s  gracious  choice,”  v.  5.  So  Cranfield,  Haldane,  Hodge,  Moo,    Morris,  Murray,  contra 
Lenski. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  339
Israel was not on account of national merit, but rather “the LORD loved you 
[Israel] and kept the oath which He swore to your forefathers. So here Paul 
brings  to  mind  this  same  foundational  truth,  namely  the  fixity  of  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  that  guarantees  the  salvation  of  national  Israel.  The 
point is well expressed by the hymn writer Thomas Olivers who wrote, “The 
God of Abraham praise.” 
  He by Himself hath sworn− 
  I on His oath depend− 
Of  course  Paul  is  not  writing  here  of  the  merit  of  the  patriarchs  which  the 
Jews  mistakenly  lauded,  but  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  them,  His  unilateral 
promise  that  rested  solely  in  His  holy  character,  His  “loyal  love”  that  is 
based  upon  elective  mercy  and  divine  integrity  which  results  in  Israel  being 
“beloved”  according  to  pure  grace.  Hence  what  was  promised  to  Abraham 
shall  certainly  be  accomplished.  The  loss  of  Israel  would  be  the  defeat  of 
God; the saving of Israel is to the praise of His glorious grace (3:3; 11:1, 11).
    
(2)  The covenant incorporates God’s immutable calling, v. 29. 
 
“For irrevocable are the gifts and calling of God.” The emphatic position of 
¢metamšlhtoj,  ametamele¯tos,  meaning  something  done  without  regret  and 
hence not to be taken back, draws attention to Paul’s passionate conviction 
that  the  details  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  have  not  been  rescinded. 
Specifically, the grace gifts (t¦ car…smata, ta charismata) cataloged in 9:4-5 
along  with  the  effectual  calling  of  God  intrinsic  to  these  have  not  been 
abrogated.  And  witness  to  this  is  the  whole  history  of  God’s  dealings  with 
Israel,  not  only  throughout  the  Old  Testament  (Isa.  49:14-16),  but  also  on 
into the New Testament era that will climax with “all Israel being saved.” In 
other  words,  fundamental  to  God’s  dealing  with  Israel  is  His  immutable 
promise  to  Abraham  that  finds  fulfillment  through  David  and  Christ  that 
includes  the  engrafting  of  the  Gentiles  (Eph.  2:12-13).
68
    Here  we  see  that 
God’s moral character, his holy integrity, is at the heart of His saving work.  
 
b.  According to universal mercy, vs. 30-32. 
 
It  is  a  common  quirk  of  human  nature  that  we  more  readily  focus  on  grace 
bestowed upon ourselves and at the same time sin manifest in others (Matt. 7:3-
5).  Likewise  the  Gentiles,  particularly  in  their  ascendancy,  have  tended  to  look 
with  admiring  exclusivity  at  themselves  and  disparagement  toward  the  Jews. 
Hence  Paul  is  persistent  in  communicating  God’s  inclusive  perspective  which, 
                                              
68
  Walter C. Kaiser has maintained that this is the fundamental motif of the Old Testament. He writes: “In the 
main, this view [promise theology] agrees with the distinction between Israel and the church. But instead of 
continuing  to  say,  as  classical  dispensationalism  did,  that  there  are  two  separate  peoples  (Israel  and  the 
church) with two separate programs (the earthly kingdom and the heavenly kingdom of our Lord), this view 
stresses that there is one people (“the people of God”) with a number of discernable aspects within that one 
people (such as Israel and the church), and there is only one program of God (the “kingdom of God”) with 
numerous  aspects  under  that  single  program.”  “An  Epangelical  Response,”  eds.  Blaising  and  Block, 
Dispensationalism, Israel and the Church, p. 367. Also refer to Kaiser’s Toward an Old Testament Theology.   
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  340
though none the less particular, intends that Gentile and Jew should be accepting 
of each other even as He has been equally gracious in showing “mercy to all.” 
The significance of Paul continuing to exhort the Gentiles in particular from v. 13 
up  to  v.  32  ought  not  to  be  missed.  The  point  is  that  a  wider  perspective  is 
necessary concerning God’s design for human history. So often we are blinded by 
a  narrow  and  exclusive  frame  of  reference,  v.  18a,  that  requires  divine 
enlightenment, vs. 24-29. 
 
(1)  God’s mercy overcomes Gentile disobedience, v. 30. 
 
In  the  form  of  a  protasis,  the  Gentile  as  “you”  is  exhorted  to  recall  his 
former  disobedience  that  found  present  mercy  at  the  expense  of  Israel’s 
present  disobedience.  In  other  words,  the  Gentiles’  received  mercy  is  to  be 
pondered  in  terms  of  past  pagan  unworthiness  or  “disobedience  to  God,” 
not  relative  worthiness  when  compared  with  Israel,  which  arrogance  is 
reflected in vs. 18-20. 
 
(2)  God’s mercy overcomes Israel’s disobedience, v. 31. 
 
In the form of an apodasis, the Gentile is exhorted not to be less merciful in 
attitude  than  God  with  regard  to  “these/they”  or  the  Jews.  Mercy  received 
ought  to  beget  a  merciful  attitude  that  reaches  out  toward  those  in  need  of 
mercy  (Matt.  18:23-35).  Thus  Gentile  disobedience  followed  by  mercy 
received  is  to  be  paralleled  with  Jewish  disobedience  followed  by  mercy 
received.  The  Gentile  who  has  received  mercy  ought  to  rejoice  at  such  a 
prospect. 
 
(3)  God’s mercy overcomes universal disobedience, v. 32.   
 
So  Paul’s  grand  conclusion  is  that,  “God  has  shut  up  together  [sugkle…w, 
sunkleio¯ , cf. Luke 5:6] [the] all [both Gentile and Jew] unto disobedience for 
the purpose that He might show mercy to [the] all [both Gentile and Jew].” 
The  definite  article  here  identifies  classes  previously  described,  namely  the 
totality  of  saved,  engrafted  Gentiles,  and  “all  Israel”  previously  indicated,
69
 
and not “all men” in a possible universalist sense.
70
 The “confinement” here, 
reminiscent  of  1:24,  26,  28,  describes  these  Gentiles  and  Jews  as  being 
hopelessly  captive,  without  distinction,  3:9,  through  willful  sinning  and 
divine abandonment, so that boasting is eliminated. Yet such consignment is 
intended  to  be  eclipsed  by  sovereign  divine  mercy  that  finds  ultimate 
exaltation, especially in vs. 33-36.  
Thus God’s elect, “a great multitude which no one could count, from every 
nation  and  all  tribes  and  peoples  and  tongues”  (Rev.  7:9;  cf.  5:9)  being 
comprised  of  Gentiles  and  Jews,  has  been  hewn  from  the  pit  of  pagan 
disobedience,  through  Abraham  (Isa.  51:1-3),  according  to  divine, 
magnanimous  loving  kindness.  Thus,  “where  sin  increased,  grace  abounded 
                                              
69
  A. T. Robertson, Word Pictures In The New Testament, IV, p. 400. 
70
  So Origen, Dodd, Cranfield. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  341
all  the  more,  so  that,  as  sin  reigned  in  death,  even  so  grace  would  reign 
through  righteousness  to  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,”  5:20-
21. As Frederick W. Faber has penned: 
There’s a wideness in God’s mercy 
   Like the wideness of the sea; 
There’s a kindness in His justice 
   Which is more than liberty.  
For the love of God is broader 
   Than the measure of man’s mind, 
And the heart of the Eternal 
   Is most wonderfully kind. 
So  this  principle  is  true  of  human  history  as  this  verse  also  declares.  Lloyd-
Jones comments:  
[T]he  fact  that  you  ever  become  Christians  is  entirely  and  solely  the  result  of 
God’s grace and mercy and power. There is our general philosophy of history. 
Man made perfect, he sins, the world becomes chaotic. Civilizations try to put 
things  right–it  is  no  good,  they  are  only  going  round  in  circles,  or  think  that 
there is no purpose at all. But then you come to the Bible and you see this great 
purpose  going  right  through,  ending  in  the  vision  of  the  Book  of  Revelation; 
the final deliverance, the return of Christ, the conquest and destruction of evil 
and  the  setting  up  of  this  glorious  kingdom  which  is  eternal.  That  is  the 
biblical view or philosophy of history.
71
  
That is the triumph of divine mercy. 
 
D.  Israel’s salvation by God is glorious, vs. 33-36. 
 
When  the  gracious  saving  work  of  God  is  rightly  appreciated,  there  will  be  an  inevitable 
response of worship, praise, and adoration, personality variations notwithstanding. So here 
Paul reflects the attitude of David who, in acknowledging that God “brought me up out of 
the  pit  of  destruction,  out  of  the  miry  clay,”  then  responds,  “He  put  a  new  song  in  my 
mouth,  a  song  of  praise  to  out  God”  (Ps.  40:2-3).  But  also  notice  the  further  focus  of 
David’s  hymnic  worship.  “Behold,  I  will  not  restrain  my  lips,  O  LORD,  You  know.  I  have 
not hidden your righteousness within my heart; I have spoken of Your faithfulness and Your 
salvation;  I  have  not  concealed  Your  lovingkindness  and  Your  truth  from  the  great 
congregation.  You,  O  LORD,  will  not  withhold  your  compassion  from  me;  your 
lovingkindness and Your truth will continually preserve me” (Ps. 40:9-11). So Paul cannot 
“restrain  his  lips.”  He  must  let  the  “fire  of  grace  in  his  belly  erupt.”  He  would  agree  with 
these further lines of Faber: 
My God, how wonderful Thou art, 
   Thy Majesty how bright! 
How beautiful Thy mercy-seat, 
   In depth of burning light!  
It  is  significant  that  Robert  Haldane,  whose  commentary  on  Romans  was  the  result  of  his 
earnest  teaching  of  some  ignorant  theological  students  at  Geneva  in  1816,  gives  the 
                                              
71
  D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 11, p. 243. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  342
following extract of a letter he wrote in 1824 to Mr. Cheneviere, the well-known Socinian, 
and yet Pastor and Professor of Divinity at Geneva. “There was nothing brought under the 
consideration  of  the  students  of  divinity  who  attended  me  at  Geneva,  which  appeared  to 
contribute so effectually to overthrow their false system of religion, founded on philosophy 
and vain deceit, as the sublime view of the majesty of God presented in the four concluding 
verses of this part of the Epistle [11:33-36].”
72
 
But  what  is  the  context  here?  The  weight  of  evidence  must  come  down  on  the  side  of  the 
preceding  Rom.  9-11,
73
  but  especially  11:11-32.  Paul  is  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  the 
triumph of God’s mercy that will crown that time when “the Deliverer will come from Zion, 
He will remove ungodliness from Jacob,” v. 26. 
 
1.  The praise of God’s transcendent Being, v. 33. 
 
Paul’s  emotional  exclamation,  his  adoring  and  worshipful  “  ”,  cf.  2:1,  3;  9:20;  Gal. 
3:1;  I  Tim.  6:20,  has  been  ignited  by  the  concluding  thought  of  v.  32,  that  is  the 
unalloyed mercy and grace of God that has been exalted since 1:1-6, 16-17, and 3:21 
onwards.  It  is  mirrored  against  the  futility  of  human  law  works,  of  boasting  by  the 
Jews, 2:17-29, and more recently that of the Gentiles, 11:13-32. 
 
a.  His depth of being, v. 33a. 
 
“O  the  depth  [b£qoj,  bathos]  of  [the]  richness  and  [the]  wisdom  and  [the] 
knowledge  of  God”  suggests  not  simply  God’s  character  in  general,  but  three 
perfections that have distinct gospel significance and all coalesce in the person and 
work of Christ (2:4; 9:23; 10:12; I Cor. 1:30; Eph. 2:7; Col. 2:3). Paul is reflecting 
wonderment more than frustration concerning “this mystery” v. 25, cf. 16:25-26; 
Eph.  3:2-3,  8-9;  Col.  1:26-27;  it  is  astonishing  rather  than  incomprehensible.  So 
Lloyd-Jones  comments  that  because  Paul  has  been  expounding  God’s  great  plan 
and purpose of redemption, “he is amazed at it himself and he feels there is only 
one  thing  to  do,  and  that  is  to  praise  God  with  the  whole  of  his  being.”
74
  Like 
most  new  believers,  the  Gentile  and  Jew  had  learned  of  the  mercy  of  God,  but 
Paul expounds on a quality of mercy that provokes awe. 
 
b.  His infinitude of being, v. 33b. 
 
“How  unsearchable  [beyond  human  discovery]  are  His  judgments  [righteous 
decisions]  and  unfathomable  [beyond  human  comprehension]  are  His  ways 
[providential  dealings].”  The  emphasis  is  not  so  much  upon  the  unknowableness 
of  God  as  the  fact  that  what  has  been  divinely  made  known  would  never  have 
been understood apart from divine revelation. The whole course of Romans 9-11 
has been the unveiling of God’s hitherto unknown purposes regarding Gentile and 
Jew.  Having  declared  that  which  he  received  by  revelation  (Eph.  3:2-3),  Paul 
                                              
72
  Haldane, Romans, p. 560. 
73
  So Cranfield, Moo, Morris, Murray. For the broader context of Rom. 1-11, Bruce, Stott.  
74
  Lloyd-Jones,  Romans  11,  p.  254.  He  also  points  out  the  fallacy  of  Willam  Barclay  at  this  juncture  who 
suggests  that  Paul,  in  his  struggle  and  difficulty  in  understanding  what  he  cannot  grasp,  simply  becomes 
resigned to the basic truth that God is love, pp. 253-5. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  343
glories  in  the  gospel  plan  that  is  God’s  by  design  and  execution,  as  well  as  the 
impossibility of it having human origination. 
 
2.  The praise of God’s infinite purposes, v. 34-35. 
 
The  sequence  of  three  questions,  drawn  from  the  Old  Testament,  is  intended  to 
reinforce  the  source  of  the  gospel  of  free  grace  as  being  exclusively  divine.  More 
recently  the  Gentile  has  been  exhorted  not  to  boast,  vs.  17-20,  and  here  he  is  being 
similarly prompted to come to an inevitable conclusion; it is that salvation is wholly of 
the Lord and exclusive of human distinctions. 
 
a.  What human has plumbed His mind? v. 34a. 
 
“For who has known the mind [noàj, nous] of the Lord?” The quotation of Isaiah 
40:13a reminds us of God’s humiliating interrogation of Job, Job 38:1-41:34. The 
expected  negative  response  is  intended  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  God  is 
known  by  revelation,  not  discovery  (I  Cor.  1:19-21);  even  the  child  of  God  does 
not assist in the establishment of the divine plan by means of sanctified aptitude. 
As John Greenleaf Whittier has written: 
Who fathoms the eternal thought? 
   Who talks of scheme and plan? 
The Lord is God! He needeth not 
   The poor device of man. 
Paul  is  not  recommending  mindless  faith,  as  the  broad  preceding  context  of 
Romans  plainly  indicates.  However,  he  does  reign  in  the  use  of  the  intellect  that 
either goes beyond or extrapolates from the revealed Word in a manner resulting 
in conclusions that God never intended.
75
 This is especially so with regard to the 
doctrine of God’s sovereignty that calls for submission rather than understanding.
   
b.  What human has plumbed His ways? v. 34b. 
 
“Who became His [fellow] counselor [sÚmbouloj, sumboulos]?” The quotation of 
Isaiah  40:13b  is  also  intended  to  abase  the  Christian,  and  especially  the  Gentile, 
who  is  convinced  that  his  eschatology  should  be  adopted  by  God.  As  Nathaniel 
West has written, “Israel, the created people of God, abides Israel, and the history 
of  Israel  is  not  a  mere  frame  in  which  to  hang  pictures  of  the  New  Testament 
church.”
76
  Even  amongst  Christians  there  is  often  retained  an  impudence  that 
attempts to bring the Bible into conformity with a precast doctrinal system, and in 
so doing there is the implicit conformity of God’s ways to our own so that we end 
up  being  His  counselor.  Job  descended  to  this  level  of  thinking,  that  is  until  he 
was humbled by God and confessed, “I know that you can do all things, and that 
no  purpose  of  Yours  can  be  thwarted.  Who  is  this  that  hides  counsel  without 
                                              
75
  By way of illustration, consider the clear biblical truth that faith is a sovereign gift of God (Matt. 16:16-17; 
Luke  22:32;  Acts  16:14;  Eph.  2:8-9)  and  not  the  ability  of  autonomous man.  Logically  speaking  then,  men 
ought  to  be  exhorted  to  seek  the  gift  of  faith  rather  than  believe.  However  the  consistent  invitation  of  the 
Bible is simply for man to believe. 
76
  Nathaniel West, The Thousand Years in Both Testaments, p. 7. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  344
knowledge? Therefore I have declared that which I did not understand, things too 
wonderful for me, which I did not know” (Job 42:1-3). 
 
c.  What human has plumbed His grace? v. 35.  
 
“Or who has first given to Him so that it might be repaid [as indebtedness]?” This 
quotation  of  Job  41:11  is  but  another  means  by  which  Paul  excludes  human 
initiative, whether in the realm of mental activity in v. 34 or human exertion here 
that obligates God. By implication the essential nature of grace, v. 6, 4:4-5; 6:23, 
is distinguished once again, and in the context of believers needing to be reminded 
of  it  as  an  abiding  principle  in  relating  one  toward  another,  whether  Gentile  or 
Jew. 
 
3.  The praise of God’s infinite glory, v. 36. 
 
Paul’s theocentricity reaches its apex here as a series of contrasting prepositions is used 
to describe God as the only independent Being! Everything and everyone else is derived 
and  dependant.  The  reason  that  God  has  exclusive  sovereignty  that  excludes  the 
initiative of Gentile and Jew is that “all things,” t¦ p£nta, ta panta, proceeding from 
Him, through Him, and to Him, are necessarily under his unqualified dominion. Thus 
the  triune  Jehovah  has  absolute  sovereignty  and  the  result  is  unparalleled  grace  and 
mercy according to His disposal. 
Of course this declaration of praise is not a mere cerebral expression, but also a fervent 
and  heart-throbbing  exclamation  that  is  inevitable  insofar  as  the  grasp  of  profound 
doctrine is concerned. John Stott well writes that:  
It is of great importance to note from Romans 1-11 that theology (our belief about God) 
and  doxology  (our  worship  of  God)  should  never  be  separated.  On  the  one  hand,  there 
can be no doxology without theology. It is not possible to worship an unknown God. . . . 
On  the  other  hand,  there  should  be  no  theology  without  doxology.  There  is  something 
fundamentally flawed about a purely academic interest in God. God is not an appropriate 
object  for  cool,  critical,  detached,  scientific  observation  and  evaluation.  No,  the  true 
knowledge of God will always lead us to worship, as it did Paul. Our place is on our faces 
before  him  in  adoration.  As  I  believe  Bishop  Handley  Moule  said  at  the  end  of  the  last 
century,  we  must  ‘beware  equally  of  an  undevotional  theology  and  of  an  untheological 
devotion’.
77
 
 
a.  His triune dominion, v. 36a. 
 
Paul,  the  converted  Jew,  testifies  to  the  essence  of  monotheism.  The  trinitarian 
formula  is  at  best  inferential.  What  are  the  “all  things”?  Morris  comments:  “It 
may  refer  to  the  universe,  the  whole  of  creation,  or  Paul  may  be  thinking  of  all 
things concerning salvation. Either way, the totality belongs to God.”
78
 
 
(1)  All things are from Him, ™x aÙtoà, ex autou, that is they originate from Him 
by creation. God is the only underived Being, while everything else is derived 
from Him. 
                                              
77
  John Stott, Romans, pp. 311-2. 
78
  Morris, Romans, p. 429. 
THE GOSPEL AND ISRAEL’S SALVATION  345
(2)  All  things  are  by  Him,  di'  aÙtoà,  di  autou,  that  is  they  are  maintained  by 
Him  according  to  sovereign  providence.  He  upholds  the  order  of  things, 
whether directly or indirectly. 
 
(3)  All things are to Him, e„j aÙtÒn, eis auton, that is they give acknowledgment 
to Him through refunded glory. God is the goal of all things. 
 
b.  His glorious dominion, v. 36b. 
 
“To  Him  be  the  glory  [¹  dÒxa,  he¯  doxa],  eternally  through  the  ages.  Amen  [Let 
the  truth  stand].”  This  doxology  is  a  prayer  of  holy  and  passionate  desire, 
especially  as  v.  32  anticipates  that  time  of  consummated  mercy.  “The  word  of 
God  has  not  failed,”  9:6a,  as  has  been  amply  demonstrated.  He  has  been  fully 
vindicated,  and  shall  be  at  the  climax  of  the  ages.  So  Jonathan  Edwards 
summarizes this grand conclusion.  
In  the  preceding  context,  the  apostle  observes  the  marvelous  disposals  of  divine 
wisdom, for causing all things to be to him, in their final issue and result, as they are 
from  him  at  first,  and  governed  by  him.  His  discourse  shows  how  God  contrived 
this and brought it to pass, by setting up the kingdom of Christ in the world; leaving 
the Jews, and calling the Gentiles; including what he would hereafter do in bringing 
in  the  Jews,  with  the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles;  with  the  circumstances  of  these 
wonderful works, so as greatly to show his justice and his goodness, to magnify his 
grace, and manifest the sovereignty and freeness of it, and the absolute dependence 
of  all  on  him.  And  then,  in  the  last  four  verses,  he  breaks  out  into  a  most  pathetic 
exclamation,  expressing  his  great admiration  of  the  depth  of  divine  wisdom, in  the 
steps he takes for attaining his end, and causing all things to be to him: and finally, 
he  expresses  a  joyful  consent  to  God’s  excellent  design  in  all  to  glorify  himself,  in 
saying, ‘to him be glory forever;’ as much as to say, as all things are so wonderfully 
ordered for his glory, so let him have the glory of all, for evermore.
79
   
 
 
 
                                              
79
  Jonathan Edwards Works (Banner), I, p. 107. 
 
CHAPTER XIV 
 
ROMANS 12:1-15:33  
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 
RUTH  and  experience,  orthodoxy  and  orthopraxy,  ethic  and  dynamic,  are  not  precisely  the 
same,  yet  they  all  suggest  the  necessary  relationship  of  knowledge  with  the  day-to-day 
expression of a living soul, in the order expressed, which results in a reactive and fruitful union. 
In simple terms, what we believe, if rightly believed, should inevitably be productive of a lifestyle 
that is complementary to that same belief. Put another way, living the Christian life is based upon 
learning  the  Christian  life.  Paul  was  certainly  of  this  opinion  since  in  his  teaching  method  he 
repeatedly  moves  from  doctrine  to  its  life  application,  as  is  evident  in  Galatians  1-4,  5-6, 
Ephesians  1-3,  4-6,  Colossians  1-2,  3-4,  as  well  as  here  at  this  major  juncture  in  Romans.  This 
principle  has  already  been  expressed  in  doctrinal  terms,  such  as  in  6:11  where  the  Christian  is 
exhorted: “Even so consider yourselves to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus.” But 
how will this new life manifest itself? Again in 7:6, “we serve in newness of the Spirit.” But what 
are  to  be  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  this  service?  Further  consider  8:3-4  where  the 
impotence of the truth concerning the law is contrasted with the potency of the truth concerning 
the gospel of Christ that is productive of walking according to the power of the Holy Spirit. But 
in  practical  terms,  what  does  this  walk,  this  new  manner  of  living  entail?  Romans  12-  16 
explains. 
In  an  intensely  relativistic,  subjective,  and  pragmatic,  age,  it  cannot be  too  strenuously declared 
that this new emphasis of Paul presupposes an understanding of the preceding truth, and for this 
reason  it  will  be  helpful  to  make  ongoing  and  frequent  reference  to  this  doctrinal  foundation. 
However,  in  the  eyes  of  this  world,  our  only  justification  for  this  professed  truth  will  be  our 
manifest living of that truth. Francis Schaeffer well describes this vital matter under the heading 
of “The Practice of Truth”: 
[I]n an age of synthesis, men will not take our protestations of truth seriously unless they see by our 
actions  that  we  seriously  practice  truth  and  antithesis  in  the  unity  we  try  to  establish  and  in  our 
activities. Without this, in an age of relativity, we cannot expect the evangelical, orthodox Church to 
mean much to the surrounding culture or even to the Church’s own children, for what we try to say 
in  our  teaching  and  evangelism  will  be  understood  in  the  twentieth-century  thought-form  of 
synthesis. Both a clear comprehension of the importance of truth and a clear practice of it, even when 
it is costly to do so, is imperative if our witness and our evangelism are to be significant in our own 
generation and in the flow of history.
1
 
 
 
A.  THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE TRANSFORMED MIND, 12:1-21. 
 
Our contemporary mind-set could easily lead us to expect that Paul will, having completed 
his carefully reasoned doctrinal presentation of theocentric gospel sanctification, now resort 
to  practical  exhortation  that  requires  less  intellectual  energy.  However  nothing  could  be 
further  from  the  truth.  In  vs.  1,  2,  3,  16  there  are  nine  references  to  the  thinking  process 
that  lead  us  to  appreciate  that  the  mind  is  at  the  heart  of  “practical  Christian  living,”  as 
                                                     
1
  Francis A. Schaeffer, The God Who Is There, pp. 168-9. 
T 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  347
many  designate  this  matter  of  concern.  John  Stott,  in  warning  about  “the  misery  and 
menace  of mindless  Christianity,”  goes  on  to  declare  four  inseparable  consequences  of  the 
right  embrace  of  biblical  truth.  “First,  knowledge  should  lead  to  worship.  .  .  .  Secondly, 
knowledge  should  lead  to  faith.  .  .  .  Thirdly,  knowledge  should  lead  to  holiness.  .  .  . 
Fourthly, knowledge should lead to love.”
2
 
 
1.  Consecration of the whole being, vs. 1-2. 
 
Paul has described a degree of dualism in the life of a Christian, that is with regard to 
the close habitation, in this present life, of “our body of sin” or “the members of your 
body”  or  “the  body  of  this  death”  with  the  new  man  who  is  “alive  to  God  in  Christ 
Jesus,”  6:6,  11,  13;  7:24.  Nevertheless,  through  the  power  of  grace  this  continuing 
conflict  is  to  evidence  emancipation  from  the  dominion  of  sin  directed  carnality,  6:6, 
14. So this tension is reintroduced, namely between the “you” and the “body,” except 
that  grace  gifts  in  the  environment  of  the  local  church  are  seen  to  be  of  practical 
significance  in  the  accomplishment  of  solicited  spiritual  activity.  Once  again,  soul 
regeneration is for Paul a fundamental presupposition. 
 
a.  Through a sanctified body, v. 1. 
 
“Therefore,  brethren  at  Rome,  with  the  constraint  of  the  mercies  of  God 
previously  expounded,  I  urge  you  according  to  apostolic  authority  [1:1]  to  offer 
up your bodies as living and holy sacrifices, which is your reasonable and spiritual 
service of worship.” The mercies, compassions of God have, since the beginning, 
climaxed at chapter1, and ought to impel even as Robert Robinson has penned: 
       O 1 to grace how great a debtor 
          Daily I’m constrained to be! 
       Let that grace, Lord, like a fetter, 
          Bind my wandering heart to Thee.  
Thus  the  physical  body  is  to  be  delivered  over  to  God,  to  be  presented  in 
consecration, in practical service, aorist of par…sthmi, pariste¯mi,
3
 after the manner 
of  a  sacrifice  with  which  both  the  Hebrew  and  Roman  cultures  were  familiar. 
Here  is  what  God  desires  of  church  members,  namely  living,  pulsating,  active 
participants in righteousness. For specific examples of desirable activity, probably 
the  following  selfless  employment  of  individual  spiritual  gifts  in  the  life  of  the 
body  of  Christ  is  in  mind,  vs.  3-13.  Thus  such  activity  is  t¾n  logik¾n  latre…an 
Ømîn, te¯ n logike¯n latreian humo¯ n, which suggests “your intelligent/true/authentic/ 
spiritual worship.” True worship is first moral in the mind, and then expressed in 
a number of consistent ways. 
 
b.  Through a sanctified mind, v. 2. 
 
If the body is the instrument of service, then the mind is the control center, so that 
it is the spiritual cerebral health of a Christian that determines the right use of our 
                                                     
2
  John Stott, Your Mind Matters, pp. 11, 44-46. 
3
   Murray,  Romans,  pp.  110-11,  gives  good  reason  for  the  “physical  body”  here,  as  with  6:6,  contra  Moo, 
Romans, 750-51, who interprets “the whole person,” as with 6:6. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  348
bodily  members.  In  other  words,  practical  Christian  living  is  stimulated  by 
focused  Christian  thinking.  Up  to  this  point  in  Romans  the  mind  has  been 
wonderfully educated concerning the numerous mercies of the gospel, yet there is 
great danger in halting at this juncture, as many Christians do who have superior 
mental  abilities.  Mere  intellectualism,  sharp  reasoning,  and  astute  argumentation 
can lead to the confusion of apprehension of truth with personal appropriation.   
 
(1)  Negatively, do not be conformed to this world. 
 
 “Do  not  be  conformed,  through  the  pressures  of  worldly  lifestyles,  to  this 
corrupt present age.” The word suschmat…zw, susche¯matizo¯ , being a present 
passive  imperative,  describes  the  coercion  of  the  schema  or  fashioning  and 
shaping  forces  in  this  present  secular,  materialist,  humanistic  era.  The  term 
“age”  here,  as  distinct  from  “world,”  has  a  temporal  nuance  that  implies  a 
different age to come, 8:18-25; 11:26-27. Such worldly constraint would be 
akin  to  the  ardent  solicitations  of  the  citizens  of  Vanity  Fair  toward  the 
transient  pilgrims,  Christian  and  Faithful,  in  Bunyan’s  The  Pilgrim’s 
Progress, who retained a holy distinctiveness. 
 
(2)  Positively, be transformed in your mind. 
 
The  strong  adversative  conjunction  here,  “But  be  transformed  by  the 
renewing of your mind” suggests that a sharp contrast with “being fashioned 
to  this  age”  is  intended.  The  word  metamorfÒw, metamorphoo¯ ,  likewise 
being  a  present  passive  imperative,  describes  an  inner  transformation,  a 
metamorphosis  of  nature  by  and  toward  the  will  of  God,  that  is  generated 
through  mental  renewal,  cf.  II  Cor.  3:18.  This  “renewal”  of  the  mind,  t¾ 
¢nakainèsei, te¯  anakaino¯ sei,  involves  personal  initiative  and  not  mere 
passive  resignation,  cf.  II  Cor.  4:16;  Col.  3:10.  Hence  the  believer  is  to 
actively  employ  his  already  regenerated  mind,  6:11;  7:6,  in  serious 
contemplation  of  “the  mercies  of  God”  previously  expounded,  specifically 
discovering  and  giving  heartfelt  approval  to  the  will  of  God  that  is  gladly 
acknowledged to be “the good, and [which is] acceptable and perfect,” being 
revealed in the doctrines of grace.  
More specifically, what is this “will of God” which is “good and acceptable 
and perfect”? Surely it is revealed through earnest study of the Word of God, 
and  Romans  in  particular;  this  “will”  has  been  wondrously  described  in 
8:26-28;  9:11;  11:33-36;  15:32,  which  study  is  to  result  in  a  spiritually 
refurnished  mind  that  in  turn  brings  about  soul  metamorphosis  and 
submission.  As  a  consequence,  the  body  that  this  soul  inhabits  and  directs 
will be offered in consecrated service to God. The practical specifics of such 
devotion are now explained.
It should also be noted that the radical process here introduced is very much 
progressive  as  the  present  tense  of  metamorfÒw, metamorphoo¯   indicates.  So 
John Murray comments: 
[T]here is here reflection upon the deep-seated and permanent change wrought 
by  the  process  of  renewal.  Sanctification  is  a  process  of  revolutionary  change 
in that which is the center of consciousness. This sounds a fundamental note in 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  349
the biblical ethic. It is the thought of progression and strikes at the stagnation, 
complacency, pride of achievement so often characterizing Christians. It is not 
the beggarly notion of second blessing that the apostle propounds but that of 
constant renewal, of metamorphosis in the seat of consciousness.
4
 
 
2.  Consecration to the body of Christ, vs. 3-16. 
 
It is no mere coincidence that Paul, having called for the consecration of the bodies of 
individual believers to the service of God, should then relate this devotion to individual 
ministry  within  the  body  of  Christ,  the  church,  v.  5,  that  which  the  Son  of  God 
purchased  with  singular  devotion  to  the  will  of  the  Father  by  means  of  his  own 
sacrificed  body  (Acts  20:28;  Eph.  5:23).  Further,  the  call  for  self-sacrifice  of  the 
believer’s  body,  v.  1.,  recalls  the  common  practice  for  such  offerings  to  be  made  in  a 
temple environment. So the believer is to offer his body in the environment of the local 
church,  which  “is  growing  into  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord”  (Eph.  2:22).  Such  growth 
results from the interaction of spiritual gifts and fruit. 
 
a.  Through spiritual gifts rightly used, vs. 3-8. 
 
Surprisingly  Moo  comments  that  here,  “[n]o  specific  relationship  with  vs.  1-2  is 
evident,”
5
 whereas the address in v. 1 to “you, brethren” and in v. 3 to “everyone 
among  you”  again  suggests  a  flow  of  thought  concerning  grace  stimulated 
spiritual  service  in  local  church  life,  that  is  arousal  produced  by  the  mercies  of 
Romans 1-11.  
 
(1)  According to sovereign allotment, v. 3. 
 
“For  I  say  to  all,  through  the  [apostolic]  grace  gift  given  to  me,  that  you 
ought  not  to  overestimate  [over  think]  your  thinking  about  yourselves, 
except  with  regard  to  what  it  is  proper  to  think,  using  sound  [sober] 
mindedness, concerning the measure of  faith that God has allotted to you.” 
The fourfold use of fronšw, phroneo¯ , here including compounds, along with 
three  uses  in  v.  16,  is  a  play  on  words  stressing  the  proper  focus  of  the 
renewed mind, v. 2. 
The  “allotted  measure  of  faith”  describes  the  sovereignly  bestowed  grace 
gifts of I Corinthians 12:7-12, even as vs. 4-7 plainly indicate. Murray puts it 
this  way:  “‘measure  of  faith’  must  reflect  on  the  different  respects  in  which 
faith  is  to  be  exercised  in  view  of  the  diversity  of  functions  existing  in  the 
church  of  Christ.”
6
  Hence  the  Christian  is  humbly  to  identify  and 
concentrate on the distinctive spiritual ability that God has granted him and 
not commonly vaunted natural abilities. 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
4
  Ibid., p. 114. 
5
  Moo, Romans, p. 759. 
6
  Murray, Romans, p. 118. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  350
(2)  According to distinctive function, vs. 4-8. 
 
Here is one of four major descriptions concerning spiritual gifts, along with I 
Corinthians  12:1-31,  Ephesians  4:7-13,  and  I  Peter  4:10-11.  Thus  the 
probability that Paul writes this epistle from Corinth should be recalled here; 
he was concerned that local church life should manifest unity with diversity; 
diversity  without  unity  results  in  schism  (I  Cor.  1:11-13);  unity  without 
diversity  results  in  dysfunction  (I  Cor.  12:17).  In  healthy  family  life  there  is 
diversity in unity, so likewise in Jesus Christ Gal. 3:28; Col. 3:10-11, 18-21. 
 
(a)  The human body has diversity in unity, v. 4. 
 
The  natural  body  is  comprised  of  “many  members”  that  do  not  have 
“the  same  function”  or  pr©xij,  praxis,  I  Cor.  12:12,  14,  20,  though 
they have all been created to work harmoniously and productively as a 
unit,  like  a  smoothly  operating  clock.  The  head  in  particular  is 
responsible  for  coordination,  especially  with  healthy  members.  It  is 
disease  in  the  body  that  causes  lack  of  coordination,  so  that  directions 
from the head are not heeded. 
 
(b)  The body of Christ has diversity in unity, vs. 5-6a 
 
So  the  spiritual  body  of  Christ,  the  church,  comprised  of  many 
interrelated  members  that  are  yet  different  in  operation,  has  an 
overriding  unity.  Now  this  interrelatedness  concerns  grace  gifts, 
car…smata,  charismata,  the  sovereignly  distributed  spoils  of  Christ’s 
victory over death and sin, Eph. 4:7-8, that are to be appropriately and 
harmoniously  exercised.  However,  it  is  the  lubricating  oil  of  gospel 
grace that brings about peace and the agreeable rather than conflicting 
interaction of the differing parts, Eph. 4:16, especially as directed by the 
Head, Eph. 1:22-23; Col. 1:18. 
 
(c)  The body of Christ has diversity in grace gifts, vs. 6b-8. 
 
The  other  major  passages  on  spiritual  gifts  also  include  the  following, 
the  word  of  wisdom,  the  word  of  knowledge,  faith,  gifts  of  healing, 
effecting  of  miracles,  distinguishing  of  spirits,  kinds  of  tongues, 
interpretation  of  tongues,  I  Cor.  12:8-10;  gifted  individuals  such  as 
apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  teachers,  Eph.  4:11;  speaking 
the utterances of God, serving, I Pet. 4:11. Here the named gifts are not 
merely to be acknowledged, but exercised in local church life.  
John  Owen  explains  that  while  spiritual  “gifts  are  not  saving, 
sanctifying  graces,  .  .  .  yet  they  are  that  without  which  the  church 
cannot subsist in the world, nor can believers be useful to one another 
and the rest of mankind, unto the glory of Christ.”
7
  
 
                                                     
7
  John Owen, Works, IV, pp. 420-21. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  351
1)  In  having  the  gift  of  prophecy,  profhte…a,  prophe¯ teia,  let  it  be 
according to t¾n ¢nalog…an tÁj p…stewj, te¯ n analogian te¯s pisteo¯ s, 
that is “the analogy [proportion, ratio] of the faith,” v. 6b. This is 
proclamation  ministry  through  revelation  from  God,  sometimes 
revealing the future, Acts 11:27-28; 21:10-12, that yet was subject 
to  scrutiny,
8
  I  Cor.  14:29,  ranking  second  to  apostolic  revelation; 
further  it  is  regulated  by  the  degree  to  which  “the  faith”  is 
comprehended.
9
 Hence here the prophetic proclamation focuses on 
the gospel substance of Romans 1-11. 
 
2)  In having the gift of service, diakon…a, diakonia, let this deaconing 
and ministering activity with regard to material needs be operative 
according to the gospel stimulus of Romans 1-11; this will alleviate 
others from such responsibilities, Acts 6:1-6; v. 7a. 
 
3)  In  having  the  gift  of  teaching  and  being  recognized  as  such, 
didaskal…a,  didaskalia,  let  the  doctrinal  substance  of  Romans  1-
11  be  communicated  to  the  local  church,  v.  7b.  Morris  makes  a 
significant point that during the first century, poor literacy skills as 
well as the shortage of books, the role of the teacher then was far 
more vital that we might appreciate today.
10
 
 
4)  In  having  the  gift  of  exhortation,  par£klhsij,  parakle¯sis,  that  is 
the  ability  to  counsel  and  encourage,  let  the  saints  be  prompted 
according  to  Romans  1-11.  Luther  adds:  “The  difference  between 
teaching  and  exhortation  is  this,  that  teaching  is  directed  to  those 
who  do  not  know,  while  exhortation  applies  to  those  who  do 
know.  The  one  builds  the  foundation,  the  other  builds  on  it  .  .  . 
[and] stimulates and moves his hearers,”
11
 v. 8a. 
 
5)  In  having  the  gift  of  giving,  metad…dwmi,  metadido¯ mi,  let  it  be 
demonstrated  with  generosity,  liberality,  spontaneity,  void  of 
duplicity,  according  to  the  constraint  of  Romans  1-11,  cf.  Matt. 
10:8;  v.  8b.  First  century  society  knew  nothing  of  today’s  social 
programs that originated over centuries through the Christianity. 
 
6)  In  having  the  gift  of  leading,  presiding,  pro…sthmi,  proistemi, 
probably  with  regard  to  elders  and deacons,  let  it  be  evident  with 
zealous  devotion  that  is  generated  by  Romans  1-11.,  v.  8c.  Thus 
various gifts would yet be employed in an orderly fashion. 
 
7)  In  having  the  gift  of  mercy,  œleoj,  eleos,  let  it  be  manifest  with 
cheerfulness,  not  legal  duty,  according  to  the  stimulus  of  Romans 
                                                     
8
  Moo, Romans, p. 765. 
9
  Murray, Romans, pp. 122-3. 
10
  Morris, Romans, p. 441. 
11
  Martin Luther, Works, 25, p. 448. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  352
1-11,  v.  8d.  Again,  the  physical  needs  of  the  first  century  would 
have been extreme by today’s standards, yet a whole new dynamic 
of grace overcame much of this wretchedness, John 13:34. 
 
b.  Through spiritual graces practically evident, vs. 9-16. 
 
It  is  significant  that  Paul,  in  moving  from  spiritual  gifts  to  spiritual  graces  in  I 
Corinthians 12-13, follows this same order here. As gifts without graces result in 
“a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal,” so that “I am nothing” and “unproductive, 
I Cor. 13:1-3, so here “love,” with its fruit, cf. Gal. 5:22-26, is the holy dynamic 
that directs the right operation of the gifts previously mentioned. Owen describes 
four common characteristics of spiritual gifts and spiritual graces (fruit). 1. They 
are  both  purchased  by  Christ.  2.  They  both  originate  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  3. 
They are both for the glory of the church. 4. They are both derived from the grace 
and bounty of Christ. Nevertheless, gifts  
are indeed works and effects, but not properly fruits of the Spirit, nor are anywhere 
so  called.  They  are  effects  of  his  operation  upon  men,  not  fruits  of  his  working  in 
them; and, therefore, many receive these gifts who never receive the Spirit as to the 
principal end for which he is promised. They receive him not to sanctify and make 
them temples unto God.
12
 
 
(1)  Love within the church, vs. 9-13. 
 
In Galatians 5:22, “the fruit [singular] of the Spirit is love [singular],” so that 
“love,”  being  foundational,  has  a  plurality  of  produce,  namely  “joy,  peace, 
patience,  kindness,  goodness,  faithfulness,  gentleness,  self-control.”  So  here, 
¹ ¢g£ph, he¯ agape¯, that is “the love,” is also foundational, being reflected in 
aspects  of  the  life  of  local  church  members  that  are  both  internal,  vs.  9-16, 
and external, vs. 17-21. 
 
(a)  Love that is holy, v. 9. 
 
Literally,  “The  love  [is]  without  hypocrisy,”  is  followed  by  a  string  of 
participles  through  to  v.  13,  thus  “[negatively]  despising  the  evil, 
[positively] clinging to the good.” However many translations make this 
an imperative statement because of the preceding and following context. 
Thus,  “Let  love  be  without  hypocrisy.  Despise  what  is  evil.  Cling  to 
what is good.” This active love is surely a result of “the love [¹ ¢g£ph, 
he¯  agape¯]  of  God  poured  out  within  our  hearts,”  5:5,  cf.  8:35,  39. 
Further it is holy love, being pure, literally without hypocrisy, unsullied 
with  devious  motives,  not  self-serving,  “does  not  seek  its  own,”  I  Cor. 
13:5; it is resolutely set apart from evil and eagerly set apart unto good, 
cf. Ps. 97:10; it is the evidence of true conversion in the heart. 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
12
  Owen, Works, IV, p. 425-9. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  353
(b)  Love that is selfless, v. 10. 
 
“[Show]  brotherly  love  to  one  another  with  devoted,  tender  affection; 
give  honor  to  one  another  by  means  of  preferential  treatment.”  Thus 
local  church  life  involves  a  sacrificial  family  relationship:  “Do  nothing 
from selfishness or empty conceit, but with humility of mind regard one 
another as more important [with regard to the bestowal of honor] than 
yourselves” (Phil. 2:3; cf. Gal. 6:10). Hence Lenski is correct in rejecting 
the thought here of, 
‘considering’ every other Christian ‘better than or superior to oneself,’. . . 
[so  as  to]  make  Paul  ask us  to  consider  as  true  what  plainly  is not  true. 
Did Paul consider every weak and erring brother better than and superior 
to himself? No. But he ever bestows all possible and all deserving honor, 
for instance, on his assistants; he leads other brethren in doing this, and 
is never greedy of honor for himself.
13
 
 
(c)  Love that is fervent before the Lord, v. 11. 
 
Loving,  selfless  service  in  local  church  life  is  further  qualified  in  the 
realm of spontaneous energy and animation. Some laborers have a sense 
of  duty  according  to  obligation  that  knows  no  delight  in  the 
employment  of  their  spiritual  gifts,  so  that  there  is  a  tendency  to  “lag 
behind  in  diligence,”  and  thus  “drag  the  feet”  so  to  speak.  But  the 
laborer rightly directed by love of the brethren will be “on fire, on the 
boil,” zšw, zeo¯ , that is fervent in his spirit. However, caution is required 
insofar as such enthusiasm is involved, for it must only be service that is 
exclusively offered to “the Lord” and is grounded on solid gospel truth 
portrayed  in  Romans  1-11,  not  subjective  sentiment.  Religious 
enthusiasm  in  general  is  very  deceptive,  but  enthusiasm  in  the  Lord 
alone  is  well  reflected  by  David,  Ps.  42:1-2;  63:1-5;  84:1-4,  by  Paul  in 
his  untiring  missionary  service,  I  Cor.  9:16-18;  II  Tim.  4:6-8,  and  it  is 
gloriously ventilated in good hymnody. 
 
(d)  Love that is persevering in trial, v. 12. 
 
Again  we  have  qualification  concerning  the  employment  of  spiritual 
gifts.  Attitudinally,  there  is  to  be  “rejoicing  in  hope,”  that  is  exultant 
anticipation  of the  consummation of  the  kingdom  of Christ,  5:2; 8:18-
25.  Temporally,  in  the  face  of  present  tribulation  and  groaning,  8:23, 
there  is  to  be  “anxious  longing,  .  .  .  eager  waiting,”  8:19,  25, 
perseverance,  endurance.  Thus:  “After  you  have  suffered  for  a  little 
while,  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  called  you  to  His  eternal  glory  in 
Christ,  will  Himself,  perfect,  confirm,  strengthen  and  establish  you”  (I 
Pet.  5:10).  Devotionally,  there  is  to  be  prayer  that  is  likewise  enduring 
in steadfastness. As Luther declares, “we must be on our guard that the 
                                                     
13
  R. C. H. Lenski, The Interpretation of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, pp. 773-4. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  354
prayers in church in our day do not become more of a hindrance than a 
help. . . . we must put real work into our praying.”
14
 
 
(e)  Love that is hospitable, v. 13. 
 
Here  is  clear  indication  that  Paul  continues  to  be  giving  direction 
regarding the interaction of spiritual gifts and fruit in local church life. 
“Fellowshipping”  koinwnoàntej,  koino¯ nountes,  here  concerns  the 
provision  of  material  needs,  food,  clothing,  shelter,  medical  care,  this 
assistance  being  elsewhere  described  as  the  gifts  of  “mercy,”  v,  8,  and 
“helps”  (I  Cor,  12:28).  The  related  term  “hospitality,”  filoxen…a, 
philoxenia,  addresses  the  care  of  visitors,  including  itinerant  Christian 
workers,  in  a  harsh  society.  However  Paul  stresses  that  such  Christian 
welfare,  totally  separate  from  civil  involvement,  is  to  be  pursued  with 
unstinting  kindness.  Nevertheless,  the  second  century    Didache  or 
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  offers  apostolic  guidance  due  to 
inevitable abuse.
15
 
 
(2)  Love without the church, vs. 14-21. 
 
The  focus  now  on  responding  to  “those  who  persecute  you,”  v.  14,  those 
who inflict “evil” v. 17a, on displaying “the right” that even “all men” will 
acknowledge,  v.  17b,  on  being  “at  peace  with  all  men,”  v.  18,  on  rejecting 
the  temptation  to  seek  “vengeance,”  v.  19,  on  showing  kindness  to  an 
“enemy,”  v.  20,”  on  “overcoming  evil  with  good,”  indicates  a  general 
emphasis on worldly opposition that is external to the Christian, though vs. 
15-16 are exceptions in this regard. 
Most  significant  here  is  the  pervasive  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  both  explicit 
and implicit with special reference to the Sermon on the Mount, that appears 
to continue on through to 14:20, and is well diagrammed by Stott.
16
 Refer to 
12:14,  17,  18,  20;  13:7,  8,  9,  11;  14:10,  12,  13,  14,  17,  20.  This  may 
indicate  not  simply  recollection  of  Gospel  accounts,  but  also  the  effect  of 
personal encounter with the Lord Jesus Christ (Acts 9:15-16; I Cor. 11:23; II 
Cor. 12:1; Gal. 1:11-12, 15-17). Hence, the magisterial doctrine of Romans 
that is grounded upon the atonement of Christ finds its proper expression in 
those who walk after the ethical mandates of Christ (John 15:14). 
 
 
 
                                                     
14
  Luther, Works, p. 458. 
15
  “Let every one that ‘cometh in the name of the Lord’ be received. . . . If he that cometh be a passer-by, give 
him all the help ye can; but he shall not stay, except, if there be need, two or three days. If he wish to abide 
with  you,  being  a  craftsman,  let  him  work  and  eat.  If  he  have  no  craft,  use  your  common  sense  to  provide 
that he may live with you as a Christian, without idleness. If he be unwilling so to do, he is a ‘Christmonger.’ 
Beware of such. But every true prophet that willeth to abide with you is ‘worthy of his food.’ In like manner a 
true  teacher  is  also,  like  the  laborer,  ‘worthy  of  his  food.’”  Documents  of  the  Christian  Church,  ed  Henry 
Bettenson, p. 92. 
16
  John Stott, Romans, pp. 317-9. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  355
(a)  Love that is kindly to enemies, v. 14. 
 
Here are three strong imperatives, the first since v. 9. “Bless,” eÙlogšw, 
eulogeo¯ , means “to speak well of,” “to eulogize,” and thus “to pray for 
good to befall a person,” rather than “curse, katar£omai, kataraomai, 
which  means  “to  pray  for  evil  to  befall  a  person.”  The  object  of  this 
prayer is persecutors, or as Luke 6:28 describes them, those who curse, 
mistreat  and  abuse  the  Christian.  Thus  Matthew  5:43-44  is  parallel 
here: “You have heard that it as said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and 
hate  your  enemy.’  But  I  say  to  you,  love  your  enemies  and  pray  for 
those  who  persecute  you.”  Jesus’  quotation  includes  the  Jewish 
perversion  of  the  Law,  namely  hatred  of  enemies,  which  led  to  the 
charge  by  Tacitus  of  the  Jews’  “hatred  to  the  human  race.”
17
  So  for 
Paul, “when we are reviled, we bless” (I Cor. 4:12), by which evidence 
we  testify  of  a  renewed  mind,  of  the  love  of  God  “poured  out  within 
our hearts,” 5:5, and not mere discharged duty. 
 
(b)  Love that is understanding, v. 15. 
 
We ourselves both rejoice and weep, and a self-absorbed frame of mind 
looks for others to respond sympathetically to our condition. But love is 
more selfless in being absorbed with the condition of others, the good of 
his “neighbor,” I Cor. 10:24, so that it is “patient, . . . kind; . . . it does 
not  seek  its  own,”  I  Cor.  13:4-5.  In  other  words,  true  local  church 
fellowship involves profound spiritual empathy so that, “if one member 
suffers, all the members suffer with it; if one member is honored, all the 
members  rejoice  with  it,”  I  Cor.  12:26.  More  than  a  performance  is 
envisaged here, such as when we manufacture the appropriate attitude; 
rather  we  genuinely  enter  into  the  other’s  joy  or  grief,  in  a  manner 
similar  to  that  of  the  Son  of  God  who  could  “sympathize  with  our 
weaknesses,” Heb. 4:15, yet without participation in them. 
 
(c)  Love that is mutual, v. 16. 
 
“Be  thinking  the  same  thoughts  amongst  each  other  [cf.  15:5;  II  Cor. 
13:11;  Phil.  2:2;  4:2];  [Do]  not  [be]  thinking  the  high  thoughts,  but be 
swept along as by a stream [in fellowship with] the lowly things [tasks 
and people?]. Do not be wise according to your own estimation.” Here 
the renewed mind is addressed, the frÒnhma, phrone¯ ma, particularly the 
thought  that  is  in  the  mind  rather  than  the  process  of  thinking.  What 
are the “high thoughts”? Moo comments: Our overly exalted opinion of 
ourselves, leading us to think that we are always right and others wrong 
and  that  our  opinions  matter  more  than  others,  often  prevents  the 
church  from  exhibiting  the  unity  to  which  God  calls  her.”
18
  The  “high 
things”  can  also  be  the  snare  of  scholasticism,  esoteric  forms  of 
worship, and the like of By-ends and company in The Pilgrim’s Progress 
                                                     
17
  John A. Broadus, Commentary on Matthew, p. 121. 
18
  Moo, Romans, p. 783. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  356
who only associate with those on pilgrimage in “golden slippers, in the 
sunshine,  and  with  applause.”  In  contrast  the  “lowly”  walk  in  “rags” 
and are ‘bound in irons.”
19
 
 
(d)  Love with respect, v. 17. 
 
As with v. 19, the Christian is not to take justice into his own hands. A 
court  may  rightly  condemn  a  personal  assailant,  yet  we  who  have 
received  mercy  are  to  show  mercy  “To  nobody  are  you  to  repay  evil 
[bad]  for  evil  [bad.  [cf.  v.  14;  Matt.  5:39,  43-44].  [Rather]  show 
thoughtful  regard  for  [the  display  of]  good  before  all  men.”  While 
charity  begins  at  home,  in  the  fellowship  of  the  local  church  at  Rome, 
yet opportunity should be sought, by means of thoughtful investigation, 
for the witness of good before the whole of this pagan society. For all of 
its  blindness,  the  imperial  city  is  able  to  acknowledge  the  good  which 
the church is to embody, as well as the bad which has stained history! 
 
(e)  Love with peace, v. 18. 
 
“If  it  is  within  your  power,  [be  at  peace]  live  peacefully  with  all  men” 
cf.  14:19;  Matthew  5:9;  Mark  9:50.  There  is  implicit  here  the  overall 
expectation of human conflict (Matt. 24:6-7), yet the child of God is to 
have  a  “saltiness”  (Matt.  5:13)  that  is  rooted  in  the  truth,  among 
others,  that  God  is  peaceable  in  His  essential  being  (15:33;  16:20). 
Further, He has made peace with such believers (5:1) and consequently 
established  a  peaceable  disposition  in  their  hearts  and  minds  (8:6; 
15:13).  Not  only  is  this  characteristic  to  be  evident  within  the  local 
church (14:19), but also universally with regard to “all men.” Hence the 
Christian is “not provoked” (I Cor. 13:5), and neither is he provocative; 
he is not drawn into contention, and neither does he contend like some 
“fighting  fundamentalist”  or  “carping  Calvinist.”  Of  course  right 
“contending for the faith” (Jude 3) is in no way eliminated here, only a 
militant  nature  that  loves  to  fight  and  conquer  such  as  the  world 
manifests. 
 
(f)  Love with deference, v. 19. 
 
Personal vindication according to the law has its place, such as where a 
Christian  leader  might  wrongly  be  charged  with  a  crime,  so  that  the 
usefulness of a servant of God might be preserved.
20
 When the plaintiff 
and the defendant are within a local church, procedure is laid down in 
the  Bible  for  dealing  with  such  incidents  (Matt.  18:15-17).  However, 
settlement  with  parties  outside  of  the  church  may  require  civil  due 
                                                     
19
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, III, p. 132-4. 
20
  John Bunyan found himself in such a situation when, in being pressed by young Agnes Beaumont for a ride 
on  the  back  of  his  horse  to  a  church  meeting,  a  scandal  developed  which  required  that  civil  authorities 
investigate.  As  a  result  Bunyan’s  innocence  was  vindicated  in  1674  so  that  his  fruitful  ministry  continued 
until his death in 1688. John Brown, John Bunyan, pp. 225-7. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  357
process,  and  necessary  enforcement,  13:3-4.  In  either  situation,  the 
Christian is not to attempt to be his own judge and jury. Therefore, as 
an  extension  of  v.  17a,  “Do  not  be  taking  your  own  revenge,  beloved, 
bur rather give place to [yield to the rule of] the wrath [of God, cf. 5:9; I 
Thess. 2:16], for it has been written, ‘Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,’ 
says  the  Lord.”  Here  Paul  gives  a  loose  quotation  of  Deuteronomy 
32:35, cf. Ps. 94:1; I Thess. 4:6; Heb. 10:30. If God has saved His elect 
in  justice,  1:16-17;  3:26,  and  that  in  pure  grace  without  their 
contribution,  then  He  is  just  as  capable  of  vindicating  His  elect  in  this 
present earthly life without their misplaced intervention (Luke 18:1-8). 
 
(g)  Love with mercy, v. 20. 
 
But what shall be our attitude toward those who assail us? Shall we do 
our  duty  according  to  v.  19,  leaving  retribution  to  God,  while  we 
restrain our instincts and inwardly seethe? No! “Rather if your enemy is 
hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him a drink. For in doing this you 
shall  heap  up  burning  coals  on  his  head”  (Prov.  25:21-22;  cf.  Matt. 
5:44;  Luke  6:27,  35).  So  the  Lord  Jesus,  “while  being  reviled,  He  did 
not  revile  in  return;  while  suffering,  He  uttered  no  threats,  but  kept 
entrusting  Himself  to  Him  who  judges  righteously”  (I  Pet.  2:23).  This 
was exemplified with his cry from the cross, “Father, forgive them; for 
they do not know what they are doing” (Luke 23:34), as well as that of 
Stephen while being stoned to death, “Lord, do not hold this sin against 
them!”  (Acts  7:60).  Concerning  this  latter  incident,  one  observer 
probably  experienced  this  crushing  weight  of  burning  shame,  even  the 
human  author  of  Romans  itself  (Acts  7:58).  But  further,  this  incident 
indicates  the  implicit  desire  and  hope  here  that  the  enemy  will 
eventually repent and be converted. 
 
(h)  Love with good, v. 21. 
 
“Do not be conquered by [the] evil, but overcome evil with [the] good.” 
This  summary  of  v.  20  suggests  that  we  are  not  to  respond  with  evil 
toward evil, as is common in the world, but rather employ that which is 
good  to  vanquish  evil.  This  principle  applies  to  both  the  individual 
Christian  as  well  as  the  local  church  as  a  whole.  For  Paul  such  a 
perspective results from a gospel rooted focus, not abstract concepts of 
evil  and  good  that  are  associated  with  social  morality  and  vaunted 
human decency. Thus “the evil” collectively represents that principle of 
corruption  pervading  both  the  whole  of  “the  creation  [subject  to]  its 
slavery,” 8:21, as well as “the flesh” of the human race that is subject to 
bondage through sin, 7:5; 8:6-8. In stark contrast is “the good” which 
collectively  represents  that  which  is  associated  with  obedience  to  “the 
truth  [of  the  gospel]”  and  “righteousness,”  2:8,  10.  Of  course  this 
“good”  is  rooted  in  the  essential  and  admirable  righteous  character  of 
God as revealed in Scripture, not Plato or Aristotle. 
 
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  358
B.  THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF TRANSFORMED RELATIONSHIPS, 13:1-14. 
 
Although  there  are  syntactical  differences  introduced  at  this  point,
21
  yet  it  remains  difficult 
to  avoid  a  connection  in  thought  between  the  exhortation  to  “overcome  evil  with  good,” 
12:21,  and  the  subsequent  exhortation  concerning  the  submission  of  the  Christian  to 
divinely  appointed  human  government.  Most  likely  the  present  relationship  between  the 
Christians at Rome and the Imperial Government has come to the Apostle’s mind, and this 
has led to the expression of 12:17-21, namely the commendation of loving non-retaliation. 
He  may  well  have  overheard  the  proposal  by  believers  of  a  retaliatory,  revolutionary 
attitude,  perhaps  stemming  from  long-standing  Judaistic  antagonism  against  Rome,  that 
needs to be addressed. Do worldly kingdoms and legislators arise by means of overcoming 
evil with good? Should these worldly entities introduce this process and so largely eliminate 
punitive legal measures? To these arising issues Paul responds.  
Furthermore,  in  the  light  of  the  Apostle  Paul’s  call  here  for  “submission  to  the  governing 
authorities,”  to  what  extent did  the  Apostles  as  a  whole  demonstrate compliance with  this 
principle in the light of the history of the early church (Acts 5:29)? So Paul injects a distinct 
body of thought, probably composed much earlier and proclaimed at a number of locations 
where this same widespread problem had presented itself, and has remained to the present.  
 
1.  Subjection to governing authorities, vs. 1-7. 
 
“Every  [living]  soul,yuc»,  psuche¯ ]  is  to  be  in  subjection  to  the  governing  authorities 
[™xous…aij  ØperecoÚsaij,  exousiais  huperechousais].”Paul  elsewhere  exhorts 
submission “to rulers, to authorities [exousiais]” (Tit. 3:1; cf. I Tim. 2:1-3), while Peter 
similarly  declares,  “Submit  yourselves  for  the  Lord’s  sake  to  every  human  institution, 
whether to a king as the one in authority [huperechonti]” (I Pet. 2:13).  The word here 
for  “governing”  is  Øperšcw,  huperecho¯ ,  meaning  “to  have  over,”  hence  to  be  high 
above, to be exalted, to rule and govern over. In Paul’s century, he particularly has in 
mind “Caesar”  (Mark 12:17),  “kings”  (I  Tim.  2:2),  “governors”  and  “heads of every 
human institution” (I Pet. 2:13-14), many of whom established  tyrannical, brutal, and 
pagan  reputations.  Certainly  the  Jews  found  such  a  concept  difficult  to  accept,  even 
though the Babylonian captivity was a lesson in this regard worth contemplating (Isa. 
44:28; Jer. 29:7).  
 
a.  Their source of authority, vs. 1-2. 
 
Basic to Paul’s teaching here is the fact that God rules over all of human kind in a 
most  comprehensive  sense  (Ps.  47:2,  8;  103:19;  Dan.  4:17,  25,  32).  Furthermore 
we  might  call  the  governance  of  God  a  communicable  attribute;  as  He  rules 
absolutely, so He has delegated governance to human kind since He, being a God 
who  delights  in  order,  therefore  delights  in  the  maintenance  of  order  on  earth; 
God  abhors  lawlessness,  anarchy  and  rebellion.  However  repulsive  the  present 
world  order  may  appear,  the  child  of  God  must  continue  to  acknowledge  and 
revere God’s present overall dominion, even in the midst of pagan administration 
                                                     
21
  It is suggested that 12:9-21 has continuity with 13:8-10; further 13:1 has no connecting particles, while 13:1-
7 has no mention of “love” and “Christ.” Moo, Romans, pp. 790-3; Morris, Romans, pp. 457-8. However 
the necessary and abrupt  inclusion  of this  tangenital though  related  thought  may  easily account for  stylistic 
variations. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  359
(Acts  4:24-28).    So  Leon  Morris  comments:  “We  should  be  clear  that  Paul  is 
writing about the existing state, not some ideal state that he hoped would appear. 
Every state has its faults, and first-century Rome had many. But it still had to be 
treated as the ruling authority and as such as the servant of God.”
22
 
 
(2)  It is established by God, v. 1. 
 
“For  there  is  no  authority  except  that  which  is  by  God,  and  those 
[authorities] which exist by God have been established [by Him]” (cf. Prov. 
8:15-16; Josephus, Wars, II, 140, “no ruler attains his office save by the will 
of God;” also Apocrypha, Wisdom of Solomon, 6:1-3). 
It is well to remember that Paul, while calling for universal, but particularly 
Christian  submission  to  pagan  authorities,  had  himself  suffered  numerous 
acts of brutality  by  means  of  these  divinely  appointed  agencies  (Acts 16:22-
24;  II  Cor.  11:23).  Hence  he  is  not  unmindful  of  exceptional  circumstances 
that fall outside of the general rule he is here proclaiming (Acts 5:29; 23:1-5). 
To uphold an absolute principle here is to contemplate impossible situations 
where  it  would  be  incumbent  upon  the  church  to  be  subject  to  state 
secularity, while conformity to government religion and immorality would be 
mandatory.  Hence,  there  is  a  limit  to  submission  here  which  the  Christian 
conscience  must  ultimately  determine,  though  clearly  he  is  to  go  to  the 
greatest lengths to conform to civil law. As Bruce points out, “Christians will 
voice  their  ‘No’  to  Caesar’s  unauthorized  demands  the  more  effectively  if 
they  have  shown  themselves  ready  to  say  ‘Yes’  to  all  his  authorized 
demands.”
23
 
In Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners, John Bunyan describes how he 
faced this dilemma. Having recently been imprisoned, under examination by 
Mr. Cobb, the Clerk of Peace, on April 3, 1661,he declared:  
Bunyan:  I  look  upon  it  as  my  duty  to  behave  myself  under  the  King’s 
government, both as becomes a man and a Christian. . . . I said, yes, and that I 
was  to  submit  to  the  King  as  supreme,  also  to  the  governors,  as  to  them  that 
are sent by him.  
Cobb: Well then, . . . the King then commands you, that you should not have 
any private meetings; because it is against the law, and he is ordained of God, 
therefore you should not have any.  
Bunyan: I told him that Paul did own the powers that were in his day, as to be 
of  God;  and  yet  he  was  often  in  prison  under  them  for  all  that.  And  also, 
though Jesus Christ told Pilate, that he had no power against him, but of God, 
yet  he  died  under  the  same  Pilate;  and  yet,  .  .  .  I  hope  you  will  not  say,  that 
either Paul, or Christ, was such as did deny magistracy, and so sinned against 
God  in  slighting  the  ordinance.  Sir,  .  .  .  the  law  hath  provided  two  ways  of 
obeying:  The  one  to  do  that  which  I  in  my  conscience  do  believe  that  I  am 
bound to do, actively; and where I cannot obey actively, there I am willing to 
lie down, and to suffer what they shall do unto me.
24
 
                                                     
22
  Morris, Romans, p. 460. 
23
  F. F. Bruce, Romans, p. 234. 
24
  John Bunyan, Works, I, pp. 59-60. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  360
In  this  regard,  Christians  are  to  be  “the  salt  of  the  earth”  (Matt.  5:13),  so 
that they best establish a peaceful and law-abiding society. But further, they 
are to pray “on behalf of all men, for kings and all who are in authority, so 
that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and dignity” (I Tim. 
2:1-2). 
 
(3)  It is resisted with consequences, v. 2. 
 
“So that the one who is resisting the [divinely] appointed] authority has been 
opposing  the  ordinance  of  God.”  Surely  Paul  has  a  revolutionary  and 
militant  spirit  in  mind  here  that  has  shamefully  marked  the  corridors  of 
church history. This is the emphasis here of ¢ntit£ssw, antitasso¯ , originally 
meaning  “to  arrange  in  battle  against,”  this  military  usage  being  sustained 
through  to  the  New  Testament  era.
25
  Consider  the  Crusades,  a  bloody 
slaughter  in  the  name  of  Christ  against  the  powers  of  Islam,  the  Papal 
Militia,  maintaining  European  dominance  such  as  by  means  of  the  Spanish 
Armada,  the  Cromwellian  revolution  against  Royalist  tyranny,  the  Fifth 
Monarchists, establishing the kingdom of Christ on earth, etc. On the other 
hand,  were  the  Reformation  that  opposed  the  Papacy  and  the  American 
Revolution that opposed England, wrong?  
Also consider the Hebrew midwives refusing to obey Pharaoh (Ex. 1:17), the 
disobedience  of  Shadrach,  Meshach  and  Abednego  toward  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Dan. 3:6-18), and the refusal of Daniel to worship Darius alone (Dan. 6:6-
13).  But  further,  were  Peter  and  John  wrong  in  declaring,  “We  must  obey 
God  rather  than  men?”  (Acts  5:29).  Obviously  not  unless  Paul’s  injunction 
here  is  taken  in  absolute  terms  that  call  for  passivity  in  the  most  evil  and 
conscience offending circumstances. Most likely he has in mind a distinct and 
circumscribed frame of reference with regard to man’s submission to the rule 
of  man,  and  not  that  of  man  to  God.  Thus  government,  even  in  its  most 
pagan  form,  is  sanctioned  by  God  to  uphold  civil  law,  the  role  of  the 
magistrate, that which is derived from “the work of the law written in their 
hearts,”  2:15,  though  certainly  not  humanist  utopianism.  The  context  here 
concerning “evil doing,” v. 4, “taxes” and “custom duties,” vs. 6-7, suggests 
this  focus,  without  “the  governing  authorities”  being  exonerated  from 
accountability.
26
 So while the Christian would never bow to the command to 
confess  Caesar  as  Lord,  yet  he  would  scrupulously  bow  to  Caesar’s  civil 
demands, including the payment of taxes and in general great respect for law 
and order 
“And  those  who  have  been  opposing  [the  magistrate  and  civil  law  as 
ordinances  of  God]  shall  receive  condemnation  upon  themselves,”  that  is 
inevitable, fearful and immediate judgment by the pagan agency itself, God’s 
                                                     
25
  Vine’s  Expository  Dictionary  of  Biblical  Words,  eds.  Vine,  Unger,  White,  p.  528;  J.  H.  Moulton  and  G. 
Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament, p. 49. 
26
  With  the  similar  teaching  of  Christ  in  mind  (Matthew  22:21),  yet  the  question  remains  as  to  whether 
excessive and extortionate taxation, such as 70% in some socialist systems, is included. Doubtless resistance 
would be in order provided the means was within the bounds of the legal process. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  361
instrument,  as  the  subsequent  context  supports,  especially  v.  4b.
27
  I 
Corinthians 11:29-30 has the same language that warns of judgment in this 
life.  The  alternative  view  of  primarily  eschatological  judgment
28
  is  at  best 
inferential.  
 
b.  Their role in society, vs. 3-4. 
 
It  is  assumed  that  Paul  has  warned  about  divine  judgment  coming  directly  from 
ruling agencies, such as Rome, due to the fact that some Christians in the Imperial 
City  have  suffered  on  account  of  their  defiance  against  “the  governing 
authorities.” Perhaps they were determined to avoid paying taxes, and as a result 
of being caught through an audit, have been severely punished and consequently 
tremble at the mere mention of the Roman authorities. Hence it is to be expected 
that  a  fearful  attitude  toward  Rome  has  developed  amongst  certain  local  church 
members; they are probably smarting over their sore experience; they now receive 
the  healing  balm  of  a  new  perspective,  that  which  replaces  rebellion  with 
reverence.  
 
(2)  They dispense praise for good, v. 3. 
 
“For those ruling do not stimulate fear in the person who is known for good 
behavior, but rather in the one who is known for evil.” Aware of perversion 
and inequity in government administration, yet Paul declares that spiritually 
blind pagan rulers are able to recognize the individual producing “the good 
work” as being worthy of peaceful subsistence and recognition. 
“Do you wish to lose this fear toward those who exercise judicial authority? 
Then do that which is [the] good and you will receive praise from the same 
[judge].”  Moo  refers  to  evidence  that  Rome  did  openly  recognize  good 
citizenship.
29
  Then  how  will  the  dominance  of  pagan  Rome  be  overcome? 
Not by the customary method of uprising, of a coup d’état, that is a violent 
overthrow, but rather spiritual revolution according to Ephesians 6:10-17, as 
salt  and  light,  that  the  world  “may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your 
Father  who  is  in  heaven”  (Matt.  5:13-16).  Thus  a  Christian  is  to  have  a 
gospel/holiness priority, not a political, right wing, activist agenda.  
 
(3)  They dispense blame for evil, v. 4. 
 
“For  [the  ruler]  is  a  minister  of  God  to  you  for  [the]  good,”  in  spite  of 
Caesar’s  claims  to  deity.  He  is  an  unwitting  servant  of  God,  even  as  were 
Cyrus  the  Persian,  Herod  the  Great,  and  Pontius  Pilate  who,  in  spite  of  his 
boasted power, “Do You not know that I have authority to release You, and 
I  have  authority  to  crucify  You?”  was  admonished  by  Christ,  “You  would 
have no authority over Me, unless it had been given you from above” (John 
19:10-11).  Further,  even  though  identifying  with  paganism,  carnality,  and 
                                                     
27
  So Barrett, Calvin, Cranfield, Godet, Murray. 
28
  So Hodge, Lenski, Moo. 
29
  Moo, Romans, pp. 800-1 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  362
brutality,  these  tyrants  are  to  receive  respect  with  regard  to  their 
maintenance  of  law  and  order.
30
  In  this  upholding  of  relative  societal  peace 
within a fallen human race, God confers a degree of honor on world leaders 
and  rulers  that  the  Christian  above  all  is  to  acknowledge.  Further,  the 
magistrate  awards  praise  on  the  good  citizen  because  of  his  evident,  ready 
compliance,  v.  3,  with  the  result  that  this  governance  proves  to  be  for  his 
advantage  In  what  way?  Perhaps  8:28  may  be  in  mind,  but  more  likely  I 
Timothy  2:2  where  prayer  is  exhorted,  “for  kings  and  all  who  are  in 
authority,  so  that  we  may  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  godliness  and 
dignity.”  Submission,  as  far  as  is  possible,  results  in  the  believer  having  a 
minimum amount of conflict which in turn enables him to better focus on his 
witness to the truth of the gospel.  
“But if you [the professing Christian] do [the] evil, then fear [the magistrate], 
for he is not carrying the sword without a reason.” What “evil” is envisaged 
here? Probably not common civil lawlessness, but a militant opposition and 
uprising  before  the  existing  administration,  supposedly  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing in the kingdom of Christ. So Haldane rightly warns: “This ought to 
caution  Christians  against  identifying  themselves  with  political  associations 
to opposes or subvert the government of their country. When they do so they 
are likely to suffer for it.”
31
 The “sword” or m£caira, machaira, here is the 
two-edged  Roman  short  sword,  commonly  used  for  regular  military  duty, 
including the execution of Roman citizens; but here it is representative of the 
severe, punitive  power of law enforcement. 
“For  he  is  a  minister  of  God,  being  a  wrathful  avenger  on  whoever  is 
practicing  evil.”  Twice  in  this  verse,  “God”  has  an  emphatic  position,  the 
intent  being  to  emphasize  the  subordination  of  all  rulers  to  divine 
government  and  delegated  authority.  Hence,  the  one  “practicing  evil”  is 
subject  to  the  vengeance  of  God  and  consequent  wrath,  all  of  which  is 
presently  mediated  through  stern  human  administration.  Here,  as  in  other 
areas  of  life,  the  Christian  is  to  perceive  human  affairs,  including  politics, 
according  to  divine  focus.  Such  perception  enables  him  to  respond  with  the 
requisite subjection.  
 
c.  Their support from Christian society, vs. 5-7. 
 
Up to this point the concern of vs. 1-4 has solely been with regard to the necessity 
of  subjection  to  government  and  rulers  without  consideration  of  the  motivating 
dynamic. Two people may obey government dictates while their reasons for doing 
so  may  be  very  different.  Surely  the  power  of  gospel  grace  in  the  life  of  the 
Christian, previously expounded, ought to be a factor here, even as it appears to 
be the case in vs. 8-10. 
                                                     
30
  This  divinely  given  authority  in  no  way  invalidates  accountability  for  paganism,  carnality  and  brutality. 
Concerning Cyrus, “[t]he accounts which have come down to us seem to make it certain that he was killed in 
battle  with  some  enemy,”  International  Standard  Bible  Encyclopedia,  II,  p.  775.  Concerning  Herod  the 
Great,  he  died  of  tumors,  worms  and  convulsions,  Josephus,  Wars,  I,  XXXIII,  5.  Similarly  his  son,  Herod 
Antipas, “was eaten by worms and died” (Acts 12:23). As for Pilate, on recall to Rome, investigation led to 
disfavor, at which he “fell into such calamities that he committed suicide.” ISBE, IV, p. 2397. 
31
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 590. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  363
(2)  With willing subjection, v. 5. 
 
“Therefore” leads to a refinement of the concept of “submission” introduced 
in v. 1. There are two ways that subjection to civil law can be fulfilled. One is 
the  restraint  of  penalty;  it  is  “because  of  [God’s]  wrath”  mediated  through 
the magistrate; it is the persuasion of punishment; it is external pressure that 
does  not  change  the  evil  heart,  but  merely  reigns  it  in.  The  other  way  of 
subjection  is  through  constraint  of  the  conscience,  sune…dhsij  suneide¯ sis, 
literally meaning “knowledge within,” which surely is more than cognition of 
God’s holy will, but rather affectionate agreement with God’s holy will, born 
of regeneration and new motives. This is glad agreement, even as 9:1 suggests 
where  Paul’s  “conscience  testifies  with  me  in  the  Holy  Spirit.”
32
  So  Peter 
exhorts, “Submit yourself for the Lord’s sake to every human institution” (I 
Pet. 2:13). Hence, whether it be the demands of civil or God’s moral law, it is 
the  renewed  heart  that  primarily  results  in  acceptable  conformity.  However, 
it  should  be  noted  that  the  “not  only,”  oÙ mÒnon, ou  monon,   here  does  not 
exclude  the  external  constraint  of  punishment;  rather  it  becomes  a 
subordinate factor. 
 
(3)  With taxation, v. 6. 
 
“For  on  account  of  this”  relates  to  the  preceding  direction  that  conscience 
provides,  v.  5.
33
  Hence  it  is  the  regenerate  conscience  that  primarily  causes 
the  Christian  to  “pay  taxes,”  not  the  threat  of  a  tax  audit  and  penalty!  He 
“conscientiously” looks upon the Internal Revenue Service with respect, not 
rebellion. As a broad principle, this dynamic of the inward life of God in the 
believer’s  soul  has  had  repeated  emphasis  in  the  preceding  doctrinal 
presentation  (5:5;  6:4,  11;  7:4-6;  8:3-6,  14-16);  now  it  finds  most  practical 
expression.  Therefore,  since  “rulers  are  servants  of  God  [in  the 
administration  of  an  orderly  society],  constantly  attending  to  necessary 
compliance  in  this  matter  [and  thus  unconsciously  carrying  out  their  divine 
mandate],”  it  follows  that  the  Christian’s  God-directed  conscience  will 
actively consent to the tax code, again, because God is administratively in it! 
 
(4)  With honor, v. 7. 
 
The  matter  of  civic  responsibility  for  the  child  of  God  is  now  broadened. 
“Pay  back  to  all  [every  civic  agency  and  ruler]  whatever  is  owed.”  Four 
categories of indebtedness are revealed: 
 
(a)  “To the tax-gatherer, you are obliged to pay the levied tax,” for he is a 
minister  of  God,  cf.  Mark  12:14-17.  This  federal  type  of  tax,  fÒroj, 
phoros, was “tribute” paid by a conquered nation in subjection.  
 
                                                     
32
  While  sune…dhsij,  suneide¯sis  is  used  in  2:15  with  reference  to  Gentiles,  it  is  questionable  if  it  has  the  same 
Christian orientation as here. 
33
  So Cranfield, Moo, Murray. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  364
(b)  “To the custom agent, you are obliged to pay the levied duty,” for he is 
a minister of God. This regional duty, tšloj, telos, was paid in Palestine 
for more local administration. 
 
(c)  “To  the  ruler  engendering  fear,  you  are  obliged  to  pay  the  response of 
fear,” for he is a minister of God. Caesar declared that he would rather 
be a dog than a son of Herod the Great. Yet reverent fear is his due.  
 
(d)  “To the ruler engendering honor, you are obliged to pay the response of 
honor,”  for  he  is  a  minister  of  God.  Yet  the  acknowledgment  that 
Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 3:1-30) and Caesar are deity must be excluded. 
 
Thus  for  the  Christian,  to  whom  God’s  “divine  power  has  granted  .  .  . 
everything pertaining to life and godliness” (II Pet. 1:3), his participation in 
secular  life  is  directed  by  a  focus  that  perceives  God’s  overarching 
administration.  This  is  not  to  deny  a  contrast  between  the  sacred  and  the 
secular,  light  and  darkness,  the  holy  and  the  unholy.  However,  God  reigns 
over  the  “principalities  and  powers”  (Col.  2:10;  Eph.  1:20-21),  particularly 
through His Son. Thus the child of God reveres such administration because 
of  the  kinship  which  his  renewed  heart  has  with  this  divine  dominion.  For 
this reason the Christian, though an alien in the world, yet is not alientated 
in  his  mind  from  the  affairs  of  this  world.  For  his  reverent  conformity 
requires  some  understanding  of  what  the  “principalities  and  powers”  are 
about.  
 
2.  Subjection to the law of love, vs. 8-10. 
 
In  Romans  1-11,  “love,”  ¢g£ph/¢gap£w,  agape¯/agapao¯ ,  is  only  used  with  regard  to 
either love from or love toward God, 5:5, 8; 8:28, 35, 37; 9:13, 25. Then in 12:9-10 we 
have  the  use  of  both  ¢g£ph,  agape¯   and  filadelf…a,  philadelphia,  where  their 
meanings,  obviously  concerning  human  relationships,  distinguish  between  “love”  and 
“brotherly love,” that is love being deliberate, choice of the will,
34
 in contrast with that 
which  is  tender affection  directed toward  a  brother; here for  the  first  time  in Romans 
love  on  a  horizontal  plain  is  intended.  Then  again  in  13:8-10  ¢g£ph/¢gap£w,  agape¯
/agapao¯  love on this same human level bursts forth being mentioned five times.  
For  Paul,  “love”  from  God  is  rooted  in  the  saving  righteousness  of  a  righteous  God, 
3:26, that is “love” grounded upon atonement that satisfies God’s holiness, 5:8, which 
is  foreshadowed  in  the  Old  Testament  (Isa.  45:8;  46:12-13;  51:5-8;  56:1;  59:16-17; 
61:10-62:2).
35
  As  A.  H.  Strong  reminds  us:  “There  can  be  no  proper  doctrine  of  the 
atonement  and  no  proper  doctrine  of  retribution,  so  long  as  Holiness  is  refused  its 
preeminence. Love must have a norm or a standard, and this norm or standard can be 
found only in Holiness.”
36
 Hence, “the love of [from] God [that] has been poured out 
                                                     
34
  This is particularly true with regard to the love of God. Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words, eds. 
Vine, Unger, White Jr., pp. 381-2. 
35
  “Paul  stands  entirely  in  the  line  of  OT  tradition  when  he  speaks  of  the  love  of  God.”  Dictionary  of  New 
Testament Theology, ed. Colin Brown, II, p. 544. 
36
  A. H. Strong, Systematic Theology, p. x. Similarly Stott comments: “The truth is that love cannot manage on 
its own without an objective moral standard.” Romans, p. 349. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  365
within  our  hearts  through  the  Holy  Spirit,”  5:5,  will  produce  like  kind  in  the 
relationships between believers. 
 
a.  Love is proper indebtedness, vs. 8. 
 
“No,  not  in  any  way  are  you  to  be  in  debt  to  anyone  [to  any  other  person  or 
institution], except to be indebted to one another in love.” Clearly the avoidance 
of social indebtedness by means of a holy conscience in vs. 5-7 is the stimulus that 
leads  to  the  extended  meaning  here.  The  superior  motivation  of  “for  conscience 
sake”  in  v.  5  suggests  the  constraint  of  love  for  God  (II  Cor.  5:14),  not  merely 
legal demand by God. Therefore this dynamic of love for God governs all human 
relationships (Matt. 22:37-38), but especially within local church fellowship; it is 
at the heart of right affections; it is the only obligation which, happily, is never to 
be brought to full settlement. 
The context re paying taxes and duty indicates that indebtedness is not essentially 
wrong,  even  as  Jesus  taught  (Matt.  5:42);  the  prohibition  here  concerns  a  bad 
attitude  towards  debts  arising  from  contractual  arrangements.  In  other  words, 
indebtedness  is  to  be  promptly  dealt  with,  and  with  a  ready,  submissive  rather 
than a neglectful and grudging spirit. 
“For whoever loves the other person [his neighbor] has fulfilled [the] law.” But is 
“the other person” here with regard to Christian fellowship or the more inclusive 
scope  of  mankind  in  general,  including  idolaters  and  pagans?  The  letter  being 
addressed  to  a  church  leads  to  the  former  opinion;  on  the  other  hand  the 
preceding context concerning submission to rulers, taxes, duty, etc. would suggest 
men in general, even as is implicit in 12:14, 17, 19-21.
37
 
But how exactly has love for “the other person [his neighbor] fulfilled [the] law”? 
The  law  or  command  of  Leviticus  19:18  is  in  mind  here, being  in  the  context  of 
many imperatives, whereas Paul is concerned with a basic inclination of the heart. 
Such  a  radical  tilt  of  affection  is  rooted  in  the  gospel,  which  finds  the  old 
command  promulgated  under  a  new  administrator  (John  13:34-35;  I  John  2:7-
11).  In  other  words,  if  the  inclination  is  present  because  of  the  regenerating 
gospel,  then  the  imperative  will  have  inevitable  fulfillment.  In  the  same  way,  if 
through the gospel there results an inclination truly to love God, then the love of 
neighbour  will  inevitably  follow  in  various  particulars  (Matt.  22:37-40).  As  a 
result “[the] law” will have been fulfilled, that is its moral essence and design, but 
not superceded. 
 
b.  Love is concern for your neighbor, v. 9. 
 
By  way  of  illustration,  Paul  makes  reference  to  the  7
th
,  6
th
,  8
th
,  and  10
th
  Mosaic 
commandments with emphasis being placed upon the imperative against adultery, 
murder, stealing, and coveting, rather than the inclination of the heart. These are 
but  representative  of  other  existing  laws  dealing  with  neighborly  relations, 
including  the  5
th
  and  9
th
  commandments  against  parental  dishonor  and  perjury. 
However,  the  more  fundamental  inclination  of  the  heart  is  then  commended  by 
                                                     
37
  So Murray, Romans, II, pp. 159-60. Cranfield, Morris, Shedd, are inclusive; Haldane, Lenski, Moo, Moule, 
are exclusive. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  366
means  of  Leviticus  19:18,  “You  shall  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself”  (cf.  Gal. 
5:14).  The  more  contemporary  understanding  of  encourage-ment  to  “self-love” 
misses the whole point here. Rather, there is assumption that man, by nature, has 
intense  self-love;  it  is  avid  concern  for  health,  comfort,  food,  recognition, 
tolerance,  etc.  and  certainly  not  mere  formal  commitment  to  these  matters.  As 
Luther suggests, “no one wishes to be robbed, harmed, killed, to be the victim of 
adultery, to be lied to, victimized by perjury, or have his property coveted.”
38
 Our 
inclination  to  personal  self-love  is  enthusiastic,  therefore  our  inclination  to 
neighbourly love is to have the same degree of fervency! 
 
c.  Love is fulfillment of the law, v. 10. 
 
Consequently:  “The  love  of  one’s  neighbor  does  not  [result]  in  working  evil 
[against  him].”  Such  an  inference  is  absurd.  Rather:  “Love  is  the  fulfillment  of 
law.” Some would suggest that the abiding moral law of Moses is kept through a 
willing spirit born of holy affections, not mere outward conformity.
39
 We may be 
certain  of  one  thing  at  this  juncture,  namely  that  the  law  of  Moses  was  never 
intended  to  produce  love;  rather  it  “came  in  so  that  the  transgression  might 
increase,” 5:20; “It was added because of transgressions” (Gal. 3:19). This brings 
to mind 8:3-4 regarding “what the Law could not do, weak as it was through the 
flesh”  and  the  remedy  concerning  what  “God  did:  sending  His  own  Son  in  the 
likeness of sinful flesh and as an offering for sin, He condemned sin in the flesh, 
so  that  the  requirement  [righteousness]  of  the  Law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who 
do  not  walk  according  to  the  flesh  but  according  to  the  Spirit,”  cf.  Gal.  5:14. 
Thus  love  fulfills  the  essential  law  of  Moses  ,  as  distinct  from  the  shell  of  its 
Jewish  administration,  with  regard  to  sexual  purity,  the  sanctity  of  human  life, 
and  property  rights.  The  new  administration  of  this  same  righteous  God  is 
according  to  “the  law  of  Christ”  (John  14:34;  I  Cor.  9:19-21;  Gal.  6:2;  I  John 
2:7-8). 
 
3.  Subjection to holy union with Christ, vs. 11-14. 
 
In  Romans  12-13,  practical  exhortation,  that  anticipates  spiritual  growth,  is  based 
upon  five  vital  elements:  1.  Mind  renewal,  12:1-2,  2.  Spiritual  gifts,  12:3-8,  13,  3. 
Spiritual  graces,  12:9-12,  14-21,  13:8-10,  4.  Conscience  direction,  13:1-7,  and  now  
Time  perspective,  13:11-14.  The  past  has  been  an  extended  period  of  darkness;  the 
present is the conclusion of the era of darkness and anticipation of light; the future day 
of  consummated  salvation  is  imminent.  Therefore,  this  time  perspective  is  a  stimulant 
for  Christians  to  presently  live  as  “children  of  light”  (John  12:36;  Eph.  5:8;  I  Thess. 
5:4-8). 
                                                     
38
  Luther, Works, 25, p. 475. 
39
  The term “moral law” is not to be found in the Bible, though some use it synonymously with regard to the 
abiding  character  of  the  Ten  Commandments  in  contrast  with  the  temporal  character  of  the  civil  and 
ceremonial law of Moses. The Decalogue certainly does contain an abiding core that reflects the unchanging 
righteousness  of  God.  However,  we  believe  that  through  the  New  Covenant  a  better  administration  of  this 
same unchanging righteousness of God has been forever instituted through Christ (Heb. 7:22; 8:1-6). Hence 
Paul  is  perfectly  at  liberty  to  use  the  Decalogue  illustratively  while  at  the  same  time  he  has  emphatically 
declared  that  the  Christian  is  no  longer  subject  to  this  old  administration,  6:14;  7:1-4;  8:3-4.  Refer  also  to 
Moo, Romans, pp. 816-7. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  367
a.  Put on the armor of light, v. 11-12. 
 
The  element  of  pilgrimage  is  also  present  here  as  we  leave  the  dark  past  behind, 
anticipate  the  glorious  future  of  light,  and  make  preparation  for  the  present 
transitional  journey  by  way  of  suitable  clothing.  So  we  are  to  “put  on  [clothe 
ourselves with] the armor of light,” v. 12, and “the Lord Jesus Christ,” v. 14. The 
original word ™ndÚw, enduo¯ , describes John the Baptist being clothed (Mark 1:6), 
and the apostles being “clothed with power from on high” (Luke 24:49); here in 
v. 12 the thought is that of offensive protection. 
 
(1)  Awake from sleep to salvation, v. 11. 
 
“[As  you  are  directed  by  love],  be  aware  of  the  [significance  of  the]  present 
time, namely that already the hour for you to arise [from spiritual lethargy] 
has arisen.” Awakening from soul slumber concerns the urgency of avoiding 
“conformity  with  the  present  evil  age  (cf.  12:2).”
40
  In  other  words,  as  you 
work  for  the  Lord,  watch  the  clock  of  history!  (Luke  12:54-6);  have 
eschatological sensitivity and discernment (Tit. 2:11-14). 
“For now [the consummation of our] salvation has drawn nearer to us than 
when  we  [first  savingly]  believed.”  Time  perspective  requires  that  we 
appreciate  the  terminus  a  quo  (starting  point),  or  past  tense  aspect  of 
salvation when we “first believed”
41
 (Eph. 1:13). Paul does equate conversion 
with  a  point  of  time  rather  than  a  process.  Time  perspective  also  requires 
that  we  appreciate  the  terminus  ad  quem  (finishing  point),  or  future  tense 
aspect  of  salvation  when  “the  day,”  v.  12,  of  Christ’s  appearing  and 
vindication dawns (I Thess. 5:9; Heb. 9:28; I Pet. 1:5). So Alford concludes: 
“On  the  certainty  of  the  event,  our  faith  is  grounded:  by  the  uncertainty  of 
the time our hope is stimulated, and our watchfulness aroused.”
42
 
 
(2)  Awake from darkness to light, v. 12. 
 
“The  night has  reached  an  advanced  stage,  and  the  dawning  of  the  day  has 
drawn near. Therefore discard the works of the darkness and be clothed with 
the weapons of light.” Johannine imagery reminds us of the ultimate triumph 
of the Light over the darkness (John 1:5; cf. Job 29:1-2; Ps. 112:4; Isa. 9:2; 
42:16; Mic. 7:8). If the “[darkness of the] night,” representative of the reign 
of sin, is measured from the Fall, then like the “last days” (Acts 2:17; Heb. 
1:1-2),  the whole  New  Testament era  is  perceived  as  that period  when  “the 
night is almost gone.” 
Thus  the  child  of  God  is  to  scrape  off  the  barnacles  or  attachments  of  the 
past,  “the  works  of  the  darkness,”  as  detailed  in  v.  13,  and  “put  on  [be 
clothed with] the full armor of God” (Eph. 6:11), Here t¦ Ópla, ta hopla, cf. 
John  18:3;  II  Cor.  10:4,  is  derived  from  the  heavily-armed  foot-soldiers  of 
ancient Greece known as “hoplites” who were, during the reign of Alexander 
                                                     
40
  Moo, Romans, p. 821. 
41
  The ingressive aorist here suggests the “commencement of faith,” cf. Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 681n. 
42
  Henry Alford, The Greek Testament, II, p. 423. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  368
the Great, the best fighters in the Mediterranean world. The thought here is 
that fighting in the dark is extremely hazardous; hence only “the weapons of 
light” are adequate for such combat that is both defensive and offensive. 
 
b.  Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, vs. 13-14. 
 
Here the Christian foot-soldier, while exhorted to be clothed with “the weapons 
of  the  light,”  is  also  to  be  clothed  with  “the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.”  What  is  the 
connection? The parallel with Galatians 3:27; Ephesians 4:24; Colossians 3:10; cf. 
Romans  6:1-11,  would  suggest  a  more  encompassing  representation  of  v.  12. 
“Weapons”  are  but  the  accouterments  and  insignia  of  the  man  “clothed  with 
Christ”  who  is  invested  with  full  recruitment  rights.  But  how  is  a  Christian, 
having been saved by Christ, to “put on Christ”? Is he not already “clothed with 
Christ”?  The  same  problem  arises  in  Romans  6:6,  11  where  “the  old  man  was 
crucified” and replaced by the new man when the Christian was united to Christ 
through  saving  faith,  yet  in  Ephesians  4:22,  24  the  Christian  is  exhorted  to  “lay 
aside the old self [man]” and “put on the new self [man].” Lloyd-Jones provides 
the  answer:  “[Paul  is  in  effect  saying]  ‘Do  not  go  on  behaving  as  if  the  old  man 
was still there. Be what you are, do not be what you no longer are.’ . . . Ephesians 
4:22 is concerned about conduct, behavior [as vs. 24-32 confirm]; Romans 6:6 is 
concerned  about  the  old  man  himself,  not  his  conduct  or  behavior.”
43
  Ephesians 
5:8 describes both “being” Light in the Lord and “walking as children of light.” 
So  here,  to  “put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ”  is  a  behavioral  exhortation,  as  v.  13 
confirms,  to  the  Christian  who  has  already  become  “clothed  with  Christ”  (Gal. 
3:27). 
 
(1)  Awake from deeds of night to day, v. 13. 
 
Darkness  is  the  common  environment  for  sinning  since  man,  with  an 
intrinsic awareness that he is sinning, yet endeavors to transgress unseen (Job 
24:15-16;  Ps.  74:20;  Prov.  3:13;  7:6-10;  Ezek.  8:12).  Specific  deeds  of 
darkness,  as  listed  by  Paul,  are  “carousing/reveling,”  “drunkenness,” 
“unlawful  sexual  intercourse,”  “debauchery/carnal  greed,”  “strife,”  and 
“jealousy/envy.”  But  the  child  of  God  “walks  in,”  invests  in  righteousness 
and  godly  wisdom,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  5:22-23),  which  are  in  stark 
contrast  with  the  deeds  done  in  the  darkness  (Prov.  4:18-19;  Eccles.  2:13; 
Gal.  5:19-21).  Such  “appropriate  behavior”  or  spiritual  deportment  by  the 
Christian  in  the  light  of  day  is  a  witness  both  easily  identified  and  open  to 
examination by God (Mark 4:22). 
 
(2)  Awake from deeds of carnality to Christ, v. 14. 
 
In view of v. 13, being clothed with Christ involves two nuances. First, this 
garment is to be obvious in the day, that is reflective of a faith and lifestyle 
that is readily identifiable as Christian. Second, this divine apparel covers the 
flesh, mortifies the deeds of the flesh in a dominant manner so that carnality 
does not intrude, 8:13. To use a military analogy, not only do “the weapons 
                                                     
43
  D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Romans 6, pp. 82-3. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  369
of  light,”  v.  12,  issued  to  a  soldier  by  his  commander,  distinguish  him,  but 
particularly.  his  uniform  likewise  designed  by  the  same  commander  (Isa. 
59:16-17; 61:10). So the faithful soldier of the Lord Jesus Christ, along with 
his fellow infantrymen, ought to be easily identifiable by means of his issued 
equipment  and  uniform.  Aurelius  Augustine  testifies  in  His  Confessions, 
concerning  his  conversion,  to  the  change  that  vs.  13-14  here  solicit.  Refer 
page 2. 
 
 
C.  THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE STRONG TOWARD THE WEAK, 14:1-15:13. 
 
Just  as  a  parent  is  aware  of  strengths  and  weaknesses  amongst  his  children,  so  a  pastor  is 
sensitive  to  degrees  of  maturity  that  exist  amongst  the  children  of  God.  John  Bunyan 
portrays  this  spiritual  variable  in  his  classic  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress  when  he  contrasts  the 
hypochondriac nature of Little-faith with the King’s Champion named Great-grace. So Paul 
now  deals  with  this  problem  concerning  the  “weak”  and  the  “strong,”  though  the 
circumstances  surrounding  the  problem  that  Paul  confronts  in  Rome  have  involved 
considerable  conjecture.  Cranfield  lists  six  possibilities.
44
  Since  the  role  of  the  Mosaic  Law 
has been such a major concern of Paul, he most likely does address Jewish Christians who 
flirt  with  the  law,  perhaps  not  as  decidedly  as  the  Galatians;  but  the  susceptibility  is  very 
real since outward conformity is entrenched, cf. 4:19 re Abraham. However grace will solve 
the problem, 14:19; 15:1-3, 7, not condemnation on the part of the strong, 14:1, 10, 13. 
 
1.  Acceptance of the weak in faith, 14:1-12. 
 
It is significant that the frailty here concerns “the faith,” which is that body of essential 
Christian truth that has the gospel of free grace at its core, cf. 4:19. But how does this 
truth relate to “being strengthless,” ¢sqenšw, astheneo¯ ? Morris gets to the heart of the 
matter in commenting that Paul, 
does not mean a person who trusts Christ but little, the man of feeble faith. Rather, the 
person he has in mind is the one who does not understand the conduct implied by faith; 
perhaps  he  is  the  person  whose  faith  is  ineffective.  His  faith  is  weak  in  that  it  cannot 
sustain him in certain kinds of conduct. He does not understand that when the meaning of 
justification by faith is grasped questions like the use of meat and wine and special days 
become  irrelevant.  Paul  is  not  referring  to  basic  trust  in  Christ.  He  assumes  that  that  is 
present, for this weak person is a member of the church, not an outsider who it is hoped 
will be converted. What is being discussed is the way the believer should live, the actions 
that are permissible or required.
45
 
 
 
                                                     
44
  Cranfield, Romans, II, pp. 690-7; Moo provides six similar categories, Romans, pp. 828-9. 
1.  The “weak” are more legalistic, “Galatian;” the “strong” adhere exclusively to the righteousness of faith. 
2.  The “weak” are offended by eating meat offered to idols; the “strong” have liberty,” I Cor. 8-10. 
3.  The “weak” are Jewish Christians who fasted; the “strong” are Gentiles having liberty, 15:7-13. 
4.  The “weak” are deniers of good food for bodily discipline; the “strong” have no such self-imposed rules. 
5.  The “weak” are akin to vegetarians, disliking the killing of animals; “the “strong” have no such rules. 
6.  The  “weak”  are  Messianic  Jews  keeping  the  ceremonial  law,  but  not  legalistically;  the  “strong”  see  no 
necessity in this regard. 
45
  Morris, Romans, p. 477. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  370
a.  The Lord is the judge of the weak and strong, vs. 1-9. 
 
But  how  is  a  “weak”  believer  to  be  treated  by  his  peers?  In  a  family  with  a 
handicapped  member,  usually  the  healthy  members  will  be  very  supportive,  not 
judgmental.  But  such  is  not  the  case  in  Rome  where  man’s  self-righteous  and 
judgmental  tendency  is  erupting.  Here  are  Christians  living  in  liberty  who  are 
critical  of  those  who  retain  certain  practices  associated  with  their  past.  Here 
liberty  takes  on  a  legalistic  tone  in  that  some  feel  it  should  to  be  imposed  on 
others.  But  in  certain  areas  of  Christian  living  God  alone,  and  not  even  church 
elders, is the child of God’s judge; in biblical  Christianity there is liberty to have 
distinctive habits, diets, clothing styles, provided modesty and moral standards are 
upheld, and there is not the imposition of certain standards on others. 
 
(1)  In matters of eating, vs. 1-3. 
 
Here  the  matter  concerns  food,  perhaps  a  kosher  or  vegetarian  diet.  By 
extension, this weak person may be a former Roman Catholic, Mormon, or 
Seventh  Day  Adventist,  who  retains  past  practices;  he  may  insist  on 
unleavened  bread  or  fermented  wine  at  the  Lord’s  Table;  he  may  feel 
constrained  to  tithe;  he  may  only  eat  fish  on  Friday;  he  may  always  wear  a 
tie or never wear a tie; he may believe that a white rather than a colored shirt 
is more appropriate for church, etc. 
 
(a)  Respect another’s opinion, v. 1. 
 
We are to “accept” or “take to one’s self,” proslamb£nw, proslambano¯ , 
with  loving  tolerance,  cf.  13:8-10,  the  believer  who  has 
“opinions/reasonings”  contrary  to  our  own,  even  if  these  peripheral 
convictions and customs are legalistic remnants that are not mandatory 
for  Christians.  When  a  pastor  comes  to  a  new  church,  he  must  be 
nonjudgmental rather than iconoclastic. It is good to visit other faithful 
local churches when traveling simply for the benefit of seeing how they 
do things a little differently yet acceptably. 
 
(b)  Respect another’s diet, v. 2. 
 
“On the one hand a certain person believes he is able to eat anything,” 
including pork, Scottish black pudding, escargot, rabbit, sushi, etc. “But 
on  the  other  hand  another  person  being  weak  [only]  eats  vegetables, 
l£canon,  lachanon,”  or  “garden  herbs”  (Luke  11:42),  especially 
organically  grown  without  pesticides  or  artificial  stimulants,  not  meat 
or dairy produce or scavengers. Notice that Paul does not consider the 
arguments,  either  pro  or  con,  in  either  instance,  or  even  the  basic 
question of motivation. The real issue is one of attitude toward another 
authentic Christian. 
 
 
 
 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  371
(c)  Respect another’s rights, v. 3. 
 
“The  person  eating  [with  liberty]  is  not  to  regard  contemptuously  the 
person  not  eating  certain  foods.”  Such  an  attitude  of  spiritual 
superiority  on  the  part  of  the  strong,  that  regards  his  brother  as 
legalistic and immature, does not fulfill 13:8-10. “And the person who 
eats restrictively is not to be judging the one who eats freely.” Such an 
attitude of spiritual superiority on the part of the weak, that regards his 
brother  as  licentious,  and  lawless,  is  also  neglectful  of  13:8-20.  Morris 
is  probably  correct  in  stating  that,  “[n]ot  infrequently  the  weak  is  the 
greater  tyrant.”
46
  There  is  a  carnal  tendency  for  believers  to  be  critical 
of other Christians who do not precisely match up to our expectations 
(Luke 9:49-56). 
But  the  greater  question  about  the  peculiar  deportment  of  Christians 
who  in  some  ways  differ  from  ourselves  concerns  whether  God  has 
“accepted” or “welcomed” them or not! If God has not “received them 
to  Himself,”  proslamb£nw,  proslambano¯ ,  then  the  matter  of  these 
behavioral  issues  is  of  no  consequence.  If  God  has  “accepted  them,” 
then who are we to judgmentally spurn them? This was the substance of 
John Bunyan’s argument when he confessed that water baptism should 
not  be  a  prerequisite  for  church  membership;  if  a  person  has  been 
savingly  accepted  by  God,  then  on  that  basis  alone  they  qualify  for 
church  membership.  This  is  a  most  fundamental  point  in  all  of  our 
relations with other Christians. 
 
(2)  In matters of holy days, vs. 4-9. 
 
What are the “days” that Paul now writes about in vs. 5-6, presumably from 
Corinth?  Pagan  celebrations  are  improbable  since  Paul  is  unlikely  to 
countenance liberty to conform in this realm. However, there is considerable 
agreement  that  Jewish  festivals,  including  the  Sabbath,  are  in  mind,
47
 
especially  when  the  significance  of  the  Mosaic  Law  in  Romans  is  so 
pervasive, cf. Gal. 4:10; Col. 2:16. 
Both  with  regard to  food,  and now  holy days,  there  is  to  be mutual  respect 
with regard to the weak and strong. But a vital question remains; while Paul 
would not dissuade the strong from being strong, v. 14, is he equally content 
for the weak to be weak? Probably not; then how, in the light of his present 
exhortation is it possible for the weak to become strong?
48
 
 
                                                     
46
  Morris, Romans, p. 479. 
47
  Moo,  Romans,  p.  842,  also  Alford,  Barrett,  Gill,  Lenski,  whereas  Murray  limits  the  meaning  to  “the 
ceremonial holy days of the Levitical institution while the Sabbath remains a creation ordinance. Romans, I, 
pp. 257-9, also Hodge, Shedd. 
48
  While the “weak” to this point have been understood as “weak Christians,” Mark Nanos in The Mystery of 
Romans, pp. 103-165, makes a good case for “weak non-Christian Jews.” In this case, Paul would first desire 
conversion  of  the  “weak”  after  which  the  matter  of  “food”  and  “days”  would  find  inevitable  resolution 
through the perspective of the gospel. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  372
(a)  Respect another’s accountability, v. 4. 
 
By way of secular illustration, Paul considers a “house servant” who, to 
our  judgmental  way  of  thinking,  is  behaving  improperly;  but 
accountability concerns not ourselves, but the house servant’s “master,” 
kÚrioj, kurios, who alone has determined the status of his employee. So 
the  “weak,”  with  regard  to  “food,”  “days,”  and  other  similar  matters 
including  distinctive  clothing,  mannerisms,  cultural  quirks,
49
  is  only 
accountable to his “Lord,” kÚrioj, kurios, that is the Son of God. 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  wrote  a  book  titled  Eccentric  Preachers  in  which  he 
details  the  unconventional,  as  distinct  from  trifling,  gospel  ministers 
whose  idiosyncrasies  he  never  coveted,  yet  acknowledged  their 
usefulness  and  wrote,  “to  take  the  edge  from  the  scalping  knife  of 
slanderous  misrepresentation  and  carping  censure.”
50
  Spurgeon 
acknowledged  that  these  men  were  not  accountable  to  him,  but  rather 
their own Lord and Master. 
 
(b)  Respect another’s conviction, v. 5. 
 
“On  the  one  hand,  a  person  prefers  a  particular  day  [a  Saturday  or 
Sunday  for  religious  activity]  above  another  day.  On  the  other  hand, 
another  person  judges  all  days  [to  be  alike  for  religious  activity].  Let 
each person be fully convinced in his own mind” This is not a directive 
for liberality within local church life where all opinions on these matters 
are  suited,  rather  the  admonition  is  for  liberality  amongst  Christians 
who discover  different lifestyles  and  religious habits  amongst  Christian 
associates.  For  instance,  could  not  a  Gentile  Christian,  in  a  non-
judgmental  manner,  accommodate  himself  to  the  practice  of  a  Jewish 
Christian who was in the habit of celebrating Yom Kippur, the Day of 
Atonement,  according  to  the  Christian  understanding  of  I  Corinthians 
5:7?  In  other  words,  within  local  church  life,  under  biblical  eldership 
rule, yet there is to be liberty of conscience that is not to be abused. For 
Paul,  this  freedom  is  exclusively  under  “his  own  Lord,”  vs.  4,  6,  and 
none other. 
 
(c)  Respect another’s conscience, v. 6. 
 
Here  more  narrow  focus  is  upon  right  motivation,  which  is  defined  as 
“for  the  Lord”  and  “to  God,”  to  the  exclusion  of  merit  and  Moses 
orientation.  In  such  situations,  genuine  devotion,  whether  by  the  weak 
or strong, is not to be assaulted; a heart that authentically draws near to 
his God and Savior, however distorted or straight the way, is not to be 
judgmentally confronted. Such a God-centered interest is most likely to 
                                                     
49
  Stott describes Paul as not insisting that, “everybody else agrees with him, as he did in the early chapters of 
his letter regarding the way of salvation. No, the Roman issues were dialogismoi, ‘doubtful points’ (NEB) or 
‘disputable  matters’  (NIV),  ‘opinions’  (RSV)  on  which  it  was  not  necessary  for  all  Christians  to  agree.” 
Romans, p. 358. 
50
  C. H. Spurgeon, Eccentric Preachers, p. 223. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  373
lead  to  agreement  and  unity.  The  elders  may  have  to  establish  certain 
standards even with regard to peripheral matters that introduce discord, 
vs. 17, 19-20; perhaps the elders will have to counsel both the weak and 
strong,  but  the  individual  believer  is  not  to  be  his  own  judge  and  jury 
toward others. 
 
(d)  Respect personal insignificance, v. 7. 
 
“For  not  one  of  us  is  living  for  himself,  and  not  one  [of  us  dies]  for 
himself,”  since  a  higher  principle  applies.  The  judgmental  attitude 
toward  others  is  decidedly  self-centered  in  a  self-congratulatory  sense. 
However  a  change  of  perspective  is  required  that  focuses  on  personal 
accountability  before  God  that  will  have  peaceable  results  on  local 
church life. Both the weak and strong look inwardly with approval and 
outwardly with  disapproval;  but  should they look  heavenward  to  their 
Lord,  they  will  then  concentrate  upon  inward  disapproval  and  ready 
acceptance  of  others  who  are  different,  but  certainly  no  worse  than 
themselves. 
 
(e)  Respect divine significance, v. 8. 
 
Here  is  the  classic  God-centered  focus  of  Paul  that  should  cause  our 
petty critiques to become insignificant. Our living existence is rooted in 
the  Lord  even  as  is  our  hope  in  death;  therefore  this  reign  is  our 
supreme  concern,  especially  in  terms  of  accountability  and  fellowship. 
So  Lenski  comments:  “See  how  Paul  here  lifts  all  of  his  readers  to  the 
highest  level  and  to  a  broad,  true  vision  of  themselves  and  of  their 
relation to the Lord. See too how here, as so often, when he would solve 
some  small  question  he  offers  the  solution  that  lies  in  the  vast 
fundamentals.  He  takes  it  out  of  the  little  ill-lighted  room,  where  one 
can  hardly  see  it  aright,  into  the  full  sunlight  of  Gospel  truth,  and  the 
little  difficulty  disappears.”
51
  Too  often  the  believer  is  zealous  in  his 
concern  for  the  standing  of  others  before  the  Lord,  comparatively 
speaking,  rather  than  himself.  However  the  more  important  priority  is 
living  “for  the  Lord”  knowing  that  we  “are  the  Lord’s,”  under  his 
saving dominion, and therefore we mind our own business. 
 
(f)  Respect divine lordship over all, v. 9. 
 
The  fact  of  being  the  Lord’s  possession  is  expanded  upon,  but  this 
context  re  v.  8,  and  here,  suggests  resultant  lordship  over  those 
redeemed by the Lord, and not in a universal sense. Thus: “Christ died 
and lived again [for his own] for this purpose, namely that he might be 
Lord over both [the redeemed who are] the dead and the living.” Thus 
Christ purposely died that the redeemed might focus on him. Hence, the 
critical  brethren,  both  weak  and  strong,  are  to  defer  to  this  lordship, 
                                                     
51
  Lenski, Romans, p. 828. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  374
especially as v. 10 indicates. They are to concentrate on this loftier and 
more important matter of personal accountability to Christ. 
 
b.  The Lord is the judge of us all, vs. 10-12. 
 
The  child  of  God  is  often  trapped  by  subjective  (internal)  rather  than  objective 
(external)  thinking.  As  a  result  “self”  becomes  our  absorbing  interest.  In  Luke 
10:17-20  the  seventy  disciples  have  become  amazed  at  their  supernatural 
accomplishments,  whereas  their  Lord  cautions  them  to  redirect  their  thinking 
away from the fact that “the spirits are subject to you” toward the greater truth, 
“but rejoice that your names are recorded in heaven.” In Matthew 17:1-8 at the 
transfiguration  of  Christ  this  same  change  of  perspective  is  found  necessary.  To 
begin with Peter declares, on behalf of James and John, “Lord, it is good for us to 
be here,” v. 4. This was a wonderful experience they were having. But when the 
voice of the Father thundered from heaven, “This is My beloved Son, with whom 
I  am  well-pleased;  listen  to him!”  enjoyment  was  overtaken  with reverential  fear 
as  they,  “fell  face  down  to  the  ground  and  were  terrified,”  vs.  5-6.  So  Paul  has 
here  exalted  Christ’s  lordship  to  accomplish  this  very  end.  A  change  of  focus 
brings a change of attitude. 
 
(1)  This includes your brother, vs. 10. 
 
The  “weak”  is  again  described  as  being  judgmental  toward  the  “strong” 
while the “strong” is contemptuous toward the “weak.” There are shades of 
Matthew  7:1  here  that  draws  forth  the  sober  revelation:  “For  we  shall  all 
stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  God.”
52
  The  tù  b»mati  toà  qeoà,  to¯   be¯-
mati tou theou, is paralleled by “the judgment seat of Christ,” II Cor. 5:10. 
The allusion is to the raised Roman tribunal seat, where the magistrate sits in 
judgment,  as  did  Pilate  (Matt.  27:19;  John  19:13).  Here  the  judgment  of 
believers is described, their secure salvation notwithstanding, I Cor. 3:12-15; 
cf. Rom. 2:5-16. Such a prospect is intended to sober both the “weak” and 
“strong.”  Morris  states,  “Any  judgments  that  they  may  pass  are  irrelevant, 
and  in  the  light  of  the  assize  they  all  face  they  should  not  presume  to 
anticipate the divine judgment.”
53
 
 
(2)  This includes every knee and every tongue, vs. 11-12. 
 
In the light of 5:1; 8:1, the Apostle Paul is obviously distinguishing between 
the  justification  of  the  unjust  and  the  justification  of  the  justified,  between 
the judgment of the alien and slave to sin outside of God’s kingdom and the 
judgment of the child of God within God’s kingdom. Having said this, Paul 
continues to warn the Christian of his present responsibility and the danger 
of antinomianism that scoffs at injunctions to personal piety. 
 
(a)  God alone requires we give account, v. 11. 
 
                                                     
52
  Some manuscripts read, “of Christ.” 
53
  Morris, Romans, p. 483. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  375
The quotation of Isaiah 45:23 establishes the abiding principle that, “As 
I  live,  says  the  Lord,  to  me  [emphatic  position]  every  knee  shall  bend 
and  every  tongue  shall  confess  forth  [™xomologšw,  exomologeo¯ ,  give 
homage  as  Sovereign  and  Judge
54
]  before  God.”  Notice  that  Paul’s 
addition of “As I live, says the Lord,” cf. v. 9, indicates that he has the 
Lord  Jesus  in  mind,  even  as  is  suggested  by  the  gospel  invitation  of 
Isaiah 45:22  
   
(b)  We must individually give account, v. 12. 
 
Perhaps  alluding  to  Matthew  12:36  Paul  makes  the  thrust  even 
stronger:  “Therefore  each  one  of  us  [believers]  shall  give  a  word 
concerning  himself  to  God.”  To  “give  a  word”  was  a  common 
expression for giving account, a reckoning in a commercial sense (Luke 
16:2;  Acts  19:40;  Heb.  13:17;  I  Pet.  4:5).  However  God,  even  Jesus 
Christ, is to be the book-keeper, and not Christian brethren.  
So C. H. Spurgeon comments here: 
The apostle argues strongly against this evil spirit of censoriousness in 
the Christian Church; and to give a knock-down blow to it he says, ‘It 
is all needless; you need not judge one another, for both your brother 
and yourself will stand before the judgment seat of God. There is no 
need  of  your  condemnation,  for  if  any  man  be  worthless  the  Judge 
will  condemn  him:  you  may  not  interfere  with  the  business  of  the 
great Supreme; he will manage the affairs of men far better than you 
can.’ Yet more, your judgment is unprofitable: you would spend your 
time  much  more  profitably  if  you  would  recollect  that  you  also  who 
can  be  so  exact  and  severe  in  pointing  out  this  fault  here,  and  the 
other  fault  there,  will  be  yourselves  examined  by  an  unerring  eye. 
Your own account books have to be sent in, and to be examined item 
by  item;  therefore  look  well  to  your  own  matters.  If  you  were 
watching  your  own  heart,  out  of  which  are  the  issues  of  life;  if  you 
were watching your own opportunities for usefulness; . . . you would 
be  doing  something  that  would  pay  you  far  better  than  censuring 
others, something much more to the glory of God, much more to the 
gain of the church, much more to the comfort of your own soul.
55
 
 
2.  Encouragement of the weak in faith, 14:13-23. 
 
While  explicit  terminology  concerning  either  the  “weak”  or  “strong”  is  not  used,  at 
least not until 15:1, yet the emphasis clearly is with regard to the “strong” in relation 
to the “weak;” thus it is the “strong” who chiefly is addressed. Hence Paul gets down 
to the matter of how the “weak” might become “strong” and not become “weaker”! In 
simple  terms  the  answer  here  is  loving  concern,  not  the  imposition  of  liberty.  From 
another perspective, we are not to argue about such matters as food and clothing; love 
overlooks  these  lesser  concerns  (Prov.  10:12;  I  Pet.  4:8).  Notice  that  this  principle  is 
more broadly annunciated in 15:1-13. 
                                                     
54
  Cranfield, Romans, II, p. 710. 
55
  C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, V. 27, Sermon 1601, pp. 395-6 (Ages pagination). 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  376
a.  Give priority to the avoidance of obstacles, v. 13-16. 
 
From  a  Calvinist  perspective,  it  would  be  easy  to  conclude  that  if  a  person  is 
assuredly one of God’s elect then he will eventually respond to our admonition to 
rise  above  immature  legalism.  However  Paul  indicates  that  God  not  only  uses 
positive loving means to accomplish this end, but also the negative withdrawal of 
impediments,  not  only  watering  but  also  the  weeding  of  the  plot  in  which  the 
weak saint is growing, and some of the weeds that need to be uprooted are in fact 
our perhaps well intentioned but self-directed righteous impositions. 
 
(1)  Consider your brother’s stability, v. 13. 
 
In the light of sober reflection on God being our judge, vs. 10-12, “therefore 
let  us  stop  judging  one  another  [as  has  been  customary]”  (Matt.  7:1).  This 
weed seems to spring up everywhere in local churches, and it chokes out life 
rather  than  impart  it!  “But  do  be  more  judgmental  in  this  matter,  that  you 
do  not  place  an  item  of  stumbling  [of  tripping  over]  before  a  brother  that 
becomes  a  snare  [a  cause  of  spiritual  calamity].”  In  other  words  we  are  to 
turn  our  penchant  for  judging  upon  ourselves  and  withhold  expressions  of 
liberty  that  may  offend;  we  are  to  be  more  concerned  about  the  spiritual 
health of a brother than our own superior correctness. Thus when I entertain 
such  a  weak  brother,  the  menu  will  suit  his  convictions;  the  dress  code  will 
match  his  standards.  So  a  European  Christian,  used  to  drinking  alcoholic 
beverages,  will  not  force  this  standard  on  others  from  America  who  might 
find  it  offensive.  Similarly  an  American  Christian,  who  is  used  to  more 
colorful dress, will not flaunt his liberty in this regard when in the company 
of European Christians. 
 
(2)  Consider your brother’s conscience, v. 14. 
 
“And  I  know  and  have  been  persuaded  in  the  Lord  Jesus  that  nothing  is 
unclean in and of itself, except that whoever reckons anything to be unclean, 
to  that  person  it  is  unclean.”  Clearly  and  emphatically  Paul  identifies  with 
the  theology  of  the  strong  which  is  the  revealed  teaching  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
that  was  so  graphically  conveyed  to  Peter  (Acts  10:1-11:18;  cf.  I  Tim.  4:4; 
Tit.  1:15).  Further,  the  weak  person  here  is  wrong  in  terms  of  the 
application  of  gospel  truth  to  life,  yet  a  confrontational  approach  is  to  be 
rejected.  In  this  regard  Moo  well  states:  “What  Paul  wants  the  ‘strong’  to 
realize is that people differ in their ability to internalize truth. . . . Paul wants 
the  ‘strong’  in  faith  to  recognize  that  people  cannot  always  ‘existentially’ 
grasp  such  truth—particularly  when  it  runs  so  counter  to  a  long  and 
strongly  held  tradition  basic  to  their  own  [Jewish]  identity  as  God’s 
people.”
56
  The  same  problem  arises  with  regard  to  an  Arminian  being 
confronted with Calvinism or a Paedobaptist being confronted with Baptist 
beliefs.  
More important than truth confrontation, which can be destructive, v. 15, is 
conscience  sensitivity,  which  concern,  it  might  be  added,  is  Paul’s  method, 
                                                     
56
  Moo, Romans, p. 853. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  377
involving  patience,  by  which  the  truth  is  ultimately  embraced.  Of  course 
Paul  is  speaking  here  about  individual  relationships;  he  is  not  in  any  way 
calling  for  restrictive  proclamation  of  apostolic  doctrine  through  local 
church ministry, as the substance of Romans so well demonstrates. By way 
of  analogy,  in  healthy  family  life  it  is  usual  for  adults  to  frequently 
accommodate  their  lifestyle  to  the  limitations  of  children  concerning  their 
capacity  to  walk,  eat,  converse,  understand;  certain  legitimate  matters  are 
not spoken about lest they offend and disturb. 
 
(3)  Consider your brother’s spiritual stability, v. 15. 
 
“For if, on account of pressing liberty in the matter of food, your brother [in 
Christ]  is  hurt  [wounded  in  his  conscience],  you  are  no  longer  walking 
according  to  love.”  Here  Paul  focuses  on  the  Christian  who  is  more 
concerned  about  truth  than  the  love  of  people.  After  the  strong  Christian’s 
vigorous defense of liberty which he believes will result in conversion to his 
superior  way  of  thinking  (I  Cor.  8:10),  the  unexpected  result  is  the  weak 
Christian being offended (I Cor, 8:11); then he probably blames the resultant 
disquiet  upon  the  weak  brother,  whereas  Paul  is  of  the  opposite  opinion. 
Thus  the  strong  brother  is  to  exercise  discretion,  tender  and  considerate 
regard,  in  his  lifestyle  regulated  by  gospel  liberty.  In  broader  terms,  mature 
Christians  are  to  learn  loving  tolerance  with  regard  to  their  immature 
brethren;  sanctification  is  a  cultivated  process  and  not  all  require  identical 
nutrients even as not all have identical appetites (I Cor. 3:1-2; Heb. 5:11-14; 
I Pet. 2:1-3). 
“Do  not  ruin  with  your  food  that  one  for  whom  Christ  died”  resulting  in 
authentic  conversion.  The  word  ¢pÒllumi,  apollumi,  conveys  loss  of  well-
being  rather  than  being,  of  spiritual  destitution  rather  than  destruction,
57
  as 
in Luke 15:4, 6; I Corinthians 8:11. Gill describes this spiritual downfall as, 
“the destruction of such a man's peace and comfort, which is signified by 
grieving, stumbling, offending, and making him weak.”
58
 One element of 
ruination  would  be  the  hardening  of  the  brother  in  his  weakness,  or 
polarization  as  we  call  it  today.  From  another  perspective,  the  Christian 
with  little  faith  is  entrenched  in  his  weak  condition  and  tends  to 
fellowship  with  those  of  like  belief  and  immaturity;  so  his  condition  is 
static rather than progressive. 
 
(4)  Consider your reputation for what is good, v. 16. 
 
The  strong  Christian,  having  been  called  to  consider  the  weak  brother,  is 
now  called  to  consider  himself,  particularly  his  spiritual  reputation.  If 
contending  for  the  truth  of  gospel  liberty  results  in  contention  with  and 
aggravation in the life of a weak brother, then we are the cause of, “a good 
thing  [to]  be  spoken  of  as  evil”  NASB.  Literally  we  read:  “Therefore  the 
good  is  not  to  be  blasphemed  [disparaged,  deprecated]  on  account  of  you 
                                                     
57
  Vine, Unger, White, Jr., Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words. P. 164. 
58
  John Gill, “Romans,” Exposition of the Old and New Testaments, Ages Software, p. 401. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  378
[pl].” Thus a good end may be misrepresented through inappropriate means; 
thus a good end requires good means, and that is compassion, sympathy, and 
unselfish understanding; this is especially so in the case of a wise parent who, 
with a perspective of patient expectations spanning many years, nurtures his 
children  according  to  their  varying  ages.  A  child  who  is  pressed  to  hard, 
according  to  good  ends,  yet  can  be  ruined  even  though  the  parent/child 
relationship is never jeopardized. 
 
b.  Give priority to the fruit of the Spirit, vs. 17-18. 
 
In  the  realm  of  spiritual  horticulture,  there  is  a  tendency  to  be  ignorant  of  the 
need  to  rank  matters  having  lesser  and  greater  priority.  Further,  there  is 
misunderstanding  about  the  production  of  spiritual  fruit,  as  if  it  were  solely  a 
sovereign work that is inevitable in the true child of God; as a result the concept 
of  personal  cultivation  seems  almost  nonexistent,  perhaps  because  initiative  on 
our  part  is  judged  to  be  carnal  effort.  In  the  better  establishment  of  the  strong 
Christian, and as a consequence the establishment of the weak Christian, both of 
these elements are now addressed. 
 
(1)  Prefer that your fellowship be spiritual, v. 17. 
 
The  positive  response  to  vs.  15-16  is  the  need  to  distinguish  between 
essentials  and  non-essentials.  Self-directed  focus  on  non-essentials  can 
manifest  itself  in  various  areas  of  doctrine  such  as  ecclesiology  and 
eschatology; here the concern is with regard to sanctification.  
“For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  eating  and  drinking  [as  distinct  from  food 
and  drink],”
59
  particularly  in  a  religious  context,  which  are  elsewhere 
described  as  “weak  and  worthless  elemental  things”  (Gal.  4:9-10;  cf.  Col. 
2:16-17,  20-23)  Here  non-essentials  are  contrasted  with  the  lofty,  encom-
passing,  and  especially  sacred  concept  of  God’s  realm  as  it  has  its  apex  in 
Jesus Christ (Acts 28:30-31; I Cor. 4:20; 6:9-10; 15:50; Gal. 5:21; Eph. 5:5). 
This Son of God makes the same contrast in Matthew 6:25, 31-33 between 
material  necessities,  food,  drink,  clothing,  and  spiritual  essentials,  “the 
kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.”  This  distinction  is  further  defined 
with regard to tithing and “the weightier  provisions of the law; justice and 
mercy and faithfulness” (Matt. 23:23). 
Here  these  weightier  matters  are  described  as  “righteousness  and  peace  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit,”  being  subjective,  experiential  manifestations  of 
sanctification, the fruit of the Spirit, rather than objective representations of 
justification.
60
 This has been a dominant emphasis in Romans, 5:2-3, 11; 6:4, 
11;  7:4,  6;  8:2-6,  9-17,  23,  26-67,  31-39,  in  contrast  with  more  carnal, 
material and formal concerns, 2:27-29; 7:6; 8:4; 9:30-31; 10:1. The context 
here  concerns  Christian  deportment,  the  precedence  of  “hungering  and 
thirsting  after  righteousness”  (Matt.  5:6),  which  yet  is  grounded  upon  the 
gift  of  righteousness  through  faith.  Hence  what  supremely  counts  for  the 
                                                     
59
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 193. 
60
  Barrett, Haldane, Moo, Morris, Murray, contra Alford, Cranfield, Hodge, Lenski, Moule, Shedd, Stott,  
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  379
Christian  is  moral  alignment  with  God  (holiness),  soul  contentment  with 
God  (peace),  and  soul  life  from  God  (joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit).  Food,  drink, 
clothing,  material  comforts,  and  hundreds  of  other  barnacles  attached  to 
church life, are relatively trivial. So Isaac Watts writes: 
    Not different food, or different dress, 
       Compose the kingdom of our Lord; 
    But peace, and joy, and righteousness, 
       Faith, and obedience to his word. 
    When weaker Christians we despise, 
       We do the gospel mighty wrong; 
    For God, the gracious and the wise, 
       Receives the feeble and the strong. 
Consider David who, having sinned with Bathsheba and following the death 
of  Uriah,  for  many  months  participated  in  regular  religious  worship. 
Following  condemnation  by  Nathan  the  prophet,  true  repentance  led  the 
King  of  Israel  to  realize  what  was  really  important  (II  Sam.  11:1-12:23): 
“You  do  not  delight  in  sacrifice,  otherwise  I  would  give  it;  You  are  not 
pleased  with  burnt  offering.  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit;  a 
broken and a contrite heart, O God, You will not despise” (Ps. 51:16-17).   
         
(2)  Prefer that Christ be served acceptably, v. 18. 
 
Here is a contradistinction with that bad reputation described in v. 16 where 
the  strong  advocate  is  pushing  his  agenda:  “For  with  this  [right  sense  of 
priorities]  in  serving  Christ  we  are  pleasing  to  God  and  approved 
[vindicated/justified  in  true  godliness]  by  men.”  The  slave  of  Christ  who 
concentrates  upon  “righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit,”  v. 
17, offers discriminating service that first, pleases the Father, and second, in 
this  right  order,  results  in  the  acknowledgment  by  men,  both  believers  and 
unbelievers,  that  here  authentic  Christianity  is  manifest.  Also  it  is  in  this 
environment that the weak are strengthened, as v. 19 will intimate. 
 
c.  Give priority to peaceable fellowship, vs. 19-23. 
 
Here Paul encourages “the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace” (Eph. 4:3, 13) 
amongst  the  weak  and  strong  in  the  church  at  Rome.  As  in  I  Corinthians  12-14 
where  the  ministry  of  individual  Spiritual  gifts  is  for  the  purpose  of  edifying  the 
Body as a whole rather than personal gratification (I Cor. 12:7, 25; 13:5; 14:1-5, 
12,  26,  31),  so  here  this  goal  of  peaceful  and  united  edification  must  override 
selfish considerations 
 
(1)  You are to build rather than demolish faith, vs. 19-20. 
 
We are now introduced into the spiritual environment whereby the weak do 
in  fact  move  on  to  maturity  through  corporate  nourishment  and  loving 
involvement in local church life. 
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  380
(a)  To build is to edify, v. 19. 
 
"Consequently, let us pursue the things that contribute toward peace.” 
What  are  these  things?  Though  not  specifically  mentioned,  surely  they 
encourage the “righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit” of v. 
17  amongst  the  weak  and  strong;  they  are  truths  agreeably  held  in 
common and relate to gospel foundations that are productive of “grace 
and truth” (II Pet. 3:18). In the face of strife at Ephesus Paul writes: “Be 
kind to one another, tender-hearted, forgiving each other, just as God in 
Christ  also  has  forgiven  you.  .  .  .  [W]alk  in  love,  just  as  Christ  also 
loved you and gave Himself up for us” (Eph. 4:32-5:1). 
“And  [consequently,  let  us  also  pursue]  the  things  that  contribute 
toward  the  edification  of  one  another.”  The  word  “edification” 
o„kodom»,oikodome¯,  literally  describes  the  building  of  a  house,  while 
here  it  concerns  the  building  up  of  the  edifice  of  regenerate  souls.  In 
Ephesians  4:11-16  this  responsibility  especially  falls  on  “apostles  and 
prophets  and  evangelists  and  pastors  and  teachers,”  who  are  to  be 
“speaking  the  truth  in  love”  to  the  end  that,  “the  whole  body,  being 
fitted  and  held  together  by  what  every  joint  supplies,  according  to  the 
proper working of each individual part, causes the growth of the body 
for  the  building  up  of  itself  in  love.”  Note  the  use  here  of 
o„kodom»,oikodome¯, in vs. 12, 16. 
Thus  the  leadership  of  a  local  church  will  teach  doctrine  that  is  in 
agreement  with  the  strong  rather  than  the  weak,  such  as  Paul  writes 
about in Romans and Galatians. But mature individual members of the 
fellowship are to minister patience and compassion rather than divisive 
confrontation toward those who are immature. 
 
(b)  To demolish is to offend, v. 20. 
 
“Do not be demolishing the work of God for the sake of food. On the 
one  hand  all  things  [varieties  of  food]  are  clean.  But  they  are  bad  for 
those  who  upon  eating  are  being  offended  [in  conscience].”  Here  the 
process  opposite  to  that  of  v.  19  is  contemplated,  katalÚw,  kataluo¯ , 
describing  spiritual  impoverishment,  the  destruction  or  overthrow  of 
faith.  Note  the  use  of  both  words  in  Galatians  2:18.  For  Paul  food  is 
such a trifling matter when compared with the matter of soul stability. 
What really counts is “the work of God” whereby the saved soul should 
not  unnecessarily  be  unsettled  by  arousal  to  indignation  over  such  a 
paltry  matter  as  “sacred”  food.  Such  aggravation,  in  leading  to 
conviction  of  sin,  does  not  promote  stability  in  a  brother  who  is  more 
frail  in  faith.  In  fact  all  food  is  “sacred”  (Matt.  15:11),  so  that  the 
Mosaic  code  has  been  abolished  and  replaced  by  a  new  menu  of  food 
and drink that Christ supplies (John 6:35; 7:37). As sinners come to the 
Lord’s  banqueting  table,  long-standing  guests  are  to  be  patient  as  new 
arrivals experience a radical change of diet. 
 
 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  381
(2)  You are to refrain from upsetting faith, v. 21. 
 
“It is good not to eat meat or to drink wine or to do anything that leads to 
your  [Christian]  brother  stumbling.”  Clearly  Paul  continues  to  address  the 
strong Christian  who  is,  like  a  midwife  offering  postnatal care,  to focus on 
the  spiritual  health  of  others  rather  than  himself.  The  “meat”  and  “wine” 
may have pagan associations, yet the principle would still apply with regard 
to selfless submission to vegetarianism and alcoholic abstinence. Hence, “Do 
nothing from selfishness or empty conceit, but with humility of mind regard 
one another as more important than yourselves; do not merely look out for 
your  own  personal  interests, but  also  for  the  interests of others”  (Phil.  2:3-
4). So Christ the Strong Man likewise subjected his own divine prerogatives 
to the needs of His weak brethren (John 1:14; Phil. 2:5-8; Heb. 2:9, 14-18; 
4:15). For a believer to “stumble” here is to yield under constraint to what 
he regards to be a sin, which in fact is sin in subjective terms even if not so 
in  objective  terms,  as  v.  23  explains.  For  Paul,  it  is  far  better  to  allow  a 
peripheral,  formal  practice  in  a  stable  situation  rather  than  bruise  the 
conscience and introduce instability, 
 
(3)  You are to maintain faith at all costs, vs. 22-23. 
 
The  foregoing  has  presupposed  eating  and  drinking  by  the  strong  in  the 
presence  of  the  weak,  such  as  at  a  church  fellowship  meal  or  a  public 
restaurant. However, there is no restriction upon the strong Christian who, 
whether alone or with others of like mind, takes full advantage of his liberty 
in Jesus Christ. Here, as in this whole matter, discretion is required. 
 
(a)  Keep your own conviction before God, v. 22. 
 
“You who are [strong] having faith according to your own convictions, 
have  it  as  before  God.  Blessed  [at  peace  in  his  soul]  is  he  who  is  not 
judging  [offending/condemning]  himself  in  that  which  he  [with  liberty] 
approves.”  Surely  Paul  is  here  reflecting  on  that  blessedness  which  he 
himself  has  experienced;  indeed  he  commends  this  preferable,  mature 
condition of the soul and implicitly allows such expressed liberty where 
the  situation  is  appropriate.  However,  the  constituency of  local  church 
life in general does not allow such luxury. As John Bunyan writes: 
  Alas! Here’s children, here are great with young; 
  Here are the sick and weak, as well as strong. 
  Here are the cedar, shrub, and bruised reed; 
  Yea, here are such who wounded are, and bleed. 
  As here are some who in their grammar be, 
  So here are others in their A, B, C. 
  Some apt to teach, and others hard to learn; 
  Some see far off, others can scarce discern.
61
     
 
 
                                                     
61
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, II, p. 583. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  382
(b)  Keep your brother from sinful doubting, v. 23. 
 
“But whoever is doubtful concerning whatever he eats [or drinks] is to 
be condemned because he is not acting on the basis of faith; whatever is 
not of faith is sin.” How does this doubt arise? Through the imposition 
of  the  strong.  Therefore  Paul  considers  an  attempted  profession  of 
liberty,  by  a  would-be  “strong  man”  under  pressure,  who  in  reality  is 
influenced by sensuality and formalism, is troubled with guilt, and thus 
is weak in faith. 
The meaning of “faith” p…stewj, pisteo¯ s, is to be carefully distinguished 
in this verse, cf. vs. 1, 22. It is not so much an object in itself as trust in 
a saving object. Thus the weak Christian looks to Christ with faltering, 
clouded  vision  concerning  the  ramifications  of  the  gospel;  this  form  of 
unbelief  is  sin.  The  strong  Christian  looks  to  Christ  with  firm 
persuasion  concerning  the  ramifications  of  the  gospel;  this  faith  has 
lifestyle expression which is the “freedom that [by which] Christ set us 
free,”  for  which  reason  we  are  “not  to  be  subject  again  to  a  yoke  of 
slavery” (Gal. 5:1). However the strong are not to coerce the weak into 
faithless activity. In this situation the weak usually conform because of 
what  the  strong  Christian  requires  rather  than  on  account  of  the  clear 
will of God that illuminates their soul. 
Thus the broad principle is established that whatever action we take, if 
it is doubtful and not born of conviction that it is the right will of God, 
then that faithlessness is sin, not necessarily the distinctive activity itself. 
So Haldane rightly sums up: “To obey God acceptably, we must have a 
conviction  that  we  are  doing  the  thing  which  He  has  enjoined.”
62
 
Hence,  a  conscious  awareness  of  our  peaceable  walk  with  God,  along 
with that of our Christian brother, is a vital matter. 
 
3.  Support of the weak in faith, 15:1-13. 
 
Continuity with the preceding 14:1-23 is obvious. However, other factors have led to a 
chapter  division  at  this  point.  First  is  the  conclusive  identification  of  Paul  with  the 
“strong”  who  are  first  explicitly  identified  as  such;  this  seems  to  be  a  summing  up  of 
the  subject  at  hand  that  includes  a  climactic  application  concerning  Christ.  Second  is 
the  vocabulary  change  from  the  “weak”  to  those  now  described  as  being  “without 
strength  [impotent],”  and  thus  in  need  of  Christ.  Third  is  the  transition  into  the 
doctrine of Christ, especially as it relates to the Gentiles. Perhaps v. 7 is a more suitable 
chapter break. 
 
a.  Uphold the weak neighbor for his good, vs. 1-6. 
 
Like  a  concerned  hen  that  is  detached  from  her  chickens,  so  Paul  continues  to 
brood over the weak in particular. Now he seems to allude to the strong as also  
 
                                                     
62
  Haldane, Romans, p. 616. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  383
being  spiritual  leaders  in  this  fellowship  in  Rome,  especially  since  he  personally 
identifies with them. 
 
(1)  The strong should edify the weak, vs. 1-2. 
 
Here selfless concern for those committed to the under-shepherding of local 
church  leaders  is  a  vital  qualification,  even  as  it  is  to  be  a  characteristic  of 
every local church member (Ezek. 34:1). 
 
(a)  Bear his weaknesses, v. 1. 
 
“Now we who are the strong are indebted to bearing the weaknesses of 
those  who  are  without  strength  rather  than  pleasing  ourselves.”  Both 
Paul  and  the  strong  are  obliged  to  be  tolerant  toward  the  weak.  Such 
obligation  is  based  upon  the  toleration  of  Christ  as  the  Strong  Man 
toward  we  who  were  formerly  weak,  even  as  vs.  3,  7-9  indicate.  The 
“weak,”  ¢sqšnhma,  asthene¯ma,  13:1,  are  now  described  as  being 
“without strength,” ¢dÚnatoj, adunatos, that is lacking the strength of 
faith  to  grasp  their  emancipation  from  certain  old  covenant  ritual 
requirements.  Often  a  relatively  new  convert  will  continue  with  some 
unsavory  habits  that  are  inevitably  discarded.
63
  In  the  meanwhile,  the 
strong are to be patient with this cocoon shedding.  
Such tolerance may require self-restraint with regard to ready judgment, 
also  abstinence  from  certain  innocent  lifestyle  preferences.  Motivation 
here  is  not  the  fulfillment  of  revealed  duty  but  compassionate  concern 
born of Christ’s incomparable compassionate concern for us (I  Cor. 
10:33; II Cor. 5:14-15; Phil. 2:4). 
(b)  Build up for his good, v. 2. 
 
“Let  each  one  of  us  please  our  neighbor  for  his  good  that  results  in 
edification.”  While  the  “strong”  continue  to  be  addressed,  yet  the 
principle  of  selfless  concern  for  the  “weak”  takes  on  a  more 
encompassing perspective with the substitution of the term “neighbors” 
(Matt.  22:34-40;  Rom.  13:9-10;  Gal.  5:14;  Eph.  4:25;  Jas.  2:8). 
However  doing  “good”  is  qualified  as  “edification,”  o„kodom», 
oikodome¯,  the  promotion  of  spiritual  growth,  the  building  up  of  the 
soul,  as  in  14:19.  I  Cor.  14:12,  26.  Paul  never  uses  this  word  of  self-
edification  but  always  of  someone  else  being  edified  by  another,  even 
God (I Cor. 3:9; II Cor. 5:1). In true romance, the dominant attitude is 
“love for” with the response of “love from.” So a true church member, 
                                                     
63
  Early in his ministry at Aberavon, Wales, Dr. Martyn Lloyd-Jones smoked both cigarettes and a pipe. When 
preparing  a  sermon  on  John  8:32,  “[Y]e  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free,”  “the 
conviction suddenly came to him like a dart, ‘You are not free!’ He was convinced that his dependence upon 
smoking  was  unworthy  of  a  Christian.  For  two  to  three  weeks  he  had  an  ‘awful  struggle’  over  the  matter, 
Bethan would say that it was the only time she ever saw him depressed. Then, to prove that as a Christian he 
was not in bondage, he resolved to smoke only once a day. This he did for about a year, until April 1, 1930, 
when he gave up smoking entirely.” Iain Murray, D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, The First Forty Years, 1899-1939, 
I, p. 264. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  384
while benefiting from spiritual nurture, yet his dominant concern is “for 
each of us to please his neighbor.” 
 
(2)  The Christ should be our model, vs. 3-4. 
 
For  those  not  redeemed,  Jesus  Christ  is  an  impossible  and  futile  model;  for 
those  who  are  redeemed,  Jesus  Christ  is  an  attainable  and  familial  model 
(Rom. 8:29; II Pet. 1:4; I John 3:2). Here the modeling concerns the example 
of  Christ’s  willing  humiliation  in  “the  interests  of  others”  (Luke  22:42;  II 
Cor.  8:9;  Phil.  2:4-8;  cf.  John  13:1-17).  As  Murray  comments:  “It  is 
noteworthy  how  the  apostle  adduces  the  example  of  Christ  in  his  most 
transcendent  accomplishments  in  order  to  commend  the  most  practical 
duties.”
64
 
 
(a)  The Scripture declares his selfless burden bearing, v. 3. 
 
“For even Christ did not please himself;
65
 but just as it has been written, 
‘The  reproaches  of  those  reproaching  You  have  fallen  on  Me.’” 
Consider  Psalm  69:5-9  as  a  whole,  from  where  this  quotation  comes; 
David, as a sinner, is concerned that he will not stain the reputation of 
the “Lord GOD of hosts,” vs. 5-6. Nevertheless in response to the grace 
of  God  he  is  ready  to  bear  the  rebuke  of  God’s  enemies,  even  family 
members.  So  great  is  his  zeal  for  God’s  holy  dwelling  that,  in  thinking 
little  of  himself,  he  will  readily  deflect  the  assaults  that  are  directed 
against Him. So in John 2:17, the selfless concern of Jesus Christ in the 
cleansing  of  His  Father’s  Temple  was  noted  by  his  disciples  as  they 
recalled,  “Zeal  for  Your  house  will  consume  me”  (Ps.  69:9a).  So  here, 
with  David  as  the  antitype,  this  same  selfless  concern  of  the  Son  for 
deflecting  the  rebuke  directed  toward  his  Father  (Ps.  69:9b)  is  a model 
for true disciples of Christ. Thus how can the strong not lovingly defer 
to  the  weak  in  the  light  of  Christ’s  infinitely  greater  deference  to  the 
holy reputation of His Father?  
 
(b)  The Scripture is designed to give instruction and hope, v. 4. 
 
“For  whatever  was  written  beforehand  was  written  for  our  instruction 
so  that  through  perseverance  [resulting  from  Scripture  study]  and 
[resultant] encouragement we might have hope.” Here Paul, by way of 
excursus,  injects  a  vital  Bible  study  principle  that  he  has  just 
demonstrated. Concerning the Old Testament it may be said that all of 
it is the exhaled, inerrant Word of God; all of it is profitable, especially 
in  an  illustrative  and  applicatory  sense,  though  all  of  it  is  not  of  equal 
importance  or  equally  mandatory.  Note  that  “All  Scripture”  (II  Tim. 
3:16-17)  primarily  has  the  Old  Testament  in  mind.  So  Moo  declares: 
“The  OT,  though  no  longer  a  source  of  direct  moral  imperative  (6:14, 
                                                     
64
  Murray, Romans, II, p. 198. 
65
  According  to  Morris,  the  constative  aorist  of  ¢ršskw,  aresko¯ ,  meaning  to  please,  may  suggest  the  whole  of 
Jesus’ earthly life.” Romans, p. 498. Moo is doubtful concerning this grammatical intent. Romans, p. 868. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  385
15;  7:4),  continues  to  play  a  central  role  in  helping  Christians  to 
understand  the  climax  of  salvation  history  and  their  responsibilities  as 
the New Covenant people of God. Cf. Rom. 4:24; I Cor. 9:10; 10:11; II 
Tim.  3:16).”
66
  Thus  the  Christian,  under  the  dominion  of  Christ 
through the New Covenant, has liberty in discerning what is required of 
him according to Old Testament precept and principle, and also what in 
the  Old  Testament  is  illustrative  of  New  Testament  precept  and 
principle (Jas. 5:9-11). 
But  how  does  “perseverance”  relate  to  the  “encouragement”  and 
“hope”  that  result  from  Scripture  instruction?  The  word  Øpomon», 
hupomone¯,  also  meaning  “patience/endurance/resolve,”  or  simply 
“pilgrimage  persistence,”  describes  that  which  is  also  subjectively 
derived  from  Scripture,  even  as  in  v.  5  it  is  “God  who  gives 
perseverance  and  encouragement.”  Thus  Paul  is  emphatically 
recommending  ongoing  study  of  the  Word  of  God;  his  own  use  of  it 
throughout  Romans,  quoting  over  160  passages  from  24  books  of  the 
Old  Testament,  certainly  generates  perseverance,  encouragement,  and 
hope.  
 
(3)  The glory of God should be our end, vs. 5-6. 
 
Paul now transports us from the realm of responsible selflessness, vs. 1-4, to 
that  of divine  enabling  which  then  results  in  the  acknowledgment  of divine 
glory,  vs.  5-6.  If  you  stop  at  vs.  1-4,  the  praise  of  human  accomplishment 
will intrude; but Paul deflates such a prospect when he prays, “Now may the 
God who gives . . . grant you . . .” From another perspective, selfless service 
reaches its ultimate height when both the strong and weak, as well as Jesus 
Christ, focus on the glorification of God the Father. 
 
(a)  Through like-mindedness in Christ, v. 5. 
 
For Paul, the admonition of vs. 1-3 is not enough; through prayer is the 
acknowledgment  of  human  insufficiency  within  the  lives  of  believers 
and necessary divine bestowal of grace, (Eph. 1:15-17; 3:14-16; II Tim. 
1:16,  18).  Specifically,  while  God  gives  “perseverance  and  encour-
agement,” Paul’s primary concern is that God will enable the matchless 
example  of  Christ’s  selfless  service  to  become  a  unifying  principle,  “to 
be  of  the  same  mind”  ÐmoqumadÒn,  homothumadon  (cf.  I  Cor.  1:10;  II 
Cor.  13:11;  Phil.  1:27;  2:2,  5;  4:2),  within  the  church  at  Rome.  The 
Apostle  desires  that,  “there  be  no  division  in  the  body,  but  that  the 
members may have the same care for one another” (I Cor. 12:25). 
 
(b)  Through unity in Christ, v. 6. 
 
The  fruit  of  local  church  unity,  being  “of  the  same  mind  .  .  .  with  one 
voice  [mouth],”  is  the  display  of  God’s  excellence,  His  glory,  through 
vocal  expression  (using  good preaching,  witnessing  and  hymnody), not 
                                                     
66
  Moo, Romans, p. 869, 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  386
the  praise  of  church  administration.  The  collective  purpose  of  concord 
is again selfless interest in God’s vindication, and specifically that of the 
Father through the agency of Jesus Christ (I Cor. 15:24-28; II Cor. 1:3; 
11:31; Eph. 1:3; 5:20; Col. 1:3; 3:17). Such united proclamation could 
include the stanzas of Joseph Swain: 
How sweet, how heavenly is the sight, 
   When those who love the Lord 
In one another’s peace delight, 
   And so fulfill His Word. 
When each can feel his brother’s sigh 
   And with him bear a part; 
When sorrow flows from eye to eye 
   And joy from heart to heart. 
When free from envy, scorn and pride, 
   Our wishes all above, 
Each can his brother’s failings hide 
   And show a brother’s love. 
 
b.  Uphold one another for the common good, v. 7-13. 
 
The specificity of 14:1; 15:1 with regard to the weak and the strong seems to now 
broaden  as  tension  between  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  local  church  life,  that  conflicts 
with desirable unity, is re-considered; in so doing we are reminded of prior major 
doctrinal  emphases  that  lead  us  to  the  formal  conclusion  of  Romans  at  v.  33. 
Moo  makes  the  significant  comment  that,  “the  barrier  between  ‘strong’  and 
‘weak’  is  at  root  the  barrier  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  a  barrier  that  Christ’s 
ministry dismantled.”
67
 
 
(1)  Christ has accepted the Jew and Gentile, v. 7-12. 
 
In A Reason of My Practice in Worship, John Bunyan comments on Romans 
15:1-7 as follows: 
I am bold to hold communion with visible saints as afore [described];
68
 because 
God  hath  communion  with  them;  whose  example  in  the  case  we  are  straitly 
commanded to follow. . . . Yea, though they be saints of opinions contrary to 
you; though it goeth against the mind of them that are strong. . . . You say, to 
have  communion  with  such  weak  brethren,  reproacheth  your  opinions,  and 
practice. . . . Vain man! . . . Wherefore he that hath communion with God for 
Christ’s sake, is as good and as worthy of the communion of saints as thyself. . 
. . Now him that God receiveth and holdeth communion with, him you should 
receive and hold communion with.
69
 
 
                                                     
67
  Moo, Romans, 875-6. 
68
  Bunyan has just qualified the faith of such saints which chiefly comprises, first, the received righteousness of 
God which comes through faith alone in Jesus Christ, and second, the one baptism of the Holy Spirit. Works, 
II, pp. 609-10. 
69
  Bunyan, Works, II, p. 610. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  387
(a)  Christ has accepted us as a church, v. 7. 
 
“Therefore  you  are  to  accept  [present  tense,  receive  to  oneself  with 
special interest]
70
 one another, just as Christ also accepted [aorist tense, 
by  means  of  the  atonement]  us,  to  the  end  that  God  would  be 
glorified.” While 14:1 addresses the strong with regard to his regard for 
the weak, here the desired acceptance is to be reciprocal so that all the 
fellowship  at  Rome  are  now  addressed.  Of  course  if  God  the  Father  is 
glorified through the dying obedience of God the Son that obtained the 
redemption of the elect, Eph. 1:6, then this mutual acceptance that the 
elect manifest consequently glorifies God the Father as well, v. 6. 
Of  course  acceptance  here  amongst  a  Christian  congregation  must 
involve areas of disagreement; however these must be sublimated to the 
more important cause of the unity of the body of Christ (Ps. 133:1-3; I 
Cor. 1:10; 12:25). Thus Charles Wesley has written: 
    Touched by the loadstone of Thy love, 
             Let all our hearts agree, 
          And ever toward each other move, 
             And ever move toward Thee. 
 
(b)  Christ has accepted the Jew, v. 8. 
 
“For I say that Christ has become [perfect tense, stressing permanence] 
a  servant  of  the  circumcision  [Israel]  on  behalf  of  the  truth  of  God  for 
the  purpose  of  confirming  the  promises  that  belong  to  the  fathers” 
(Matt. 15:24). The mention of Israel first confirms the priority of 1:16; 
2:9-10.  In  reiterating  the  unity  through  acceptance  that  v.  7  has 
exhorted, it is probable that the Gentile in particular is addressed here; 
he  is  to  be  respectful  of  the  Jewish  Christian,  especially  during  the 
present period of Gentile prominence (Luke 21:24; Rom. 11:25). Notice 
that  the  distinctive  Jewish  identity  that  circumcision  indicates  is  not 
denied; but whereas Romans 11 in general deals with Israel in unbelief, 
as enemies, as severed branches, 11:7-10, 17-22, 28, here the concern is 
for  the  “remnant  according  to  God’s  gracious  choice,”  that  must  be 
lovingly  regarded  by  the  Gentiles  as  part  of  the  body  of  Christ.  As 
circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham  (Gen. 
17:10-14; Rom. 4:11), so the Christian Jew retains, through Christ, an 
inheritance in “the promises given to the fathers,” 9:5; 11:28-9. Here is 
a  further  indication  that  “it  is  not  as  though  the  word  of  God  has 
failed,” 9:6.  
 
(c)  Christ has accepted the Gentile, vs. 9-12. 
 
Not  only  has  the  Gentile  been  admonished,  but  also  the  Jewish 
Christian  has  been  reassured  of  his  covenant  security.  Moo  further 
explains  that,  “Paul  implicitly  reminds  the  ‘weak,’  mainly  Jewish 
                                                     
70
  Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words, eds. Vine, Unger, White, p. 511. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  388
Christians,  that  the  “strong,’  mainly  Gentile  Christians,  are  full 
members  of  the  people  of  God:  they,  ‘wild  olive-shoots,’  have  been 
‘grafted  in,’  11:17.  At  the  same  time,  however,  he  reminds  the  ‘strong’ 
that  the  status  they  enjoy  rests  on  a  Jewish  foundation:  ‘the  root 
supports you,’ 11:18.”
71
 
 
1)  They will glorify God’s mercy, v. 9. 
 
“And [Christ has also become a servant] to the Gentiles according 
to  His  [God’s]  mercy  to  the  end  that  God  might  be  glorified,  just 
as  it  has  been  written.”  Recalling  the  climactic  declaration  of 
praise  to  God’s  glory  concerning  God’s  distinctive  dealing  with 
Jew  and  Gentile  in  11:33-36,  here  is  similar  focus,  but  especially 
on  the  God-glorifying  incorporation  of  the  Gentile  into  “the  rich 
root  of  the  olive  tree,”  1:17.  Thus  the  barrage  of  Scripture 
quotations,  from  the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Writings,  is 
intended  to  solicit  glad  acknowledgment  from  the  Jewish 
Christians  of  what  God  has  ordained  from  the  beginning  and 
wrought by means of His comprehensive grace. 
The  quotation  of  Psalm  18:49;  cf.  II  Samuel  22:50,  is  part  of 
David’s celebration concerning the Lord’s provision of deliverance 
from  all  his  enemies  and  Saul  in  particular.  Consequently,  “the 
mercies experienced by David were too great for the praise of them 
to be confined within the narrow bounds of Palestine. He can only 
have  a  proper  auditory  in  the  nations  of  the  whole  earth.”
72
  The 
plain implication is that the heathen too can be the objects of this 
mercy if they will, with true repentance, worship only the Lord. 
 
2)  They will fellowship with the Jews, v. 10. 
 
The  Son  of  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  32:1-43,  climaxing  the 
prophet’s  life  just  prior  to  his  death,  commences,  “Give  ear,  O 
heavens, and let me speak; and let the earth hear the words of my 
mouth,” v. 1. Following the praise of Jehovah’s triumphant saving 
of His people, and that in spite of the fact that Israel “forsook God 
who made him, and scorned the Rock of his salvation,” v. 15, yet 
“the LORD will vindicate His people, and will have compassion on 
His  servants,  when  He  sees  that  their  strength  is  gone,”  v.  36. 
Therefore, “rejoice, O nations, with His people, for He will avenge 
the  blood  of  His  servants,”  v.  43.  Thus  God’s  mercy  to  Israel 
should encourage the Gentiles to have hope in this same grace. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
71
  Moo, Romans, p. 877. 
72
  E. W. Hengstenberg, The Psalms, V, p. 322. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  389
3)  They will praise the God of Israel, v. 11. 
 
“Praise  the  LORD,  all  nations;  laud  Him,  all  peoples!”  Psalm 
117:1,  as  quoted  here,  along  with  Psalm  47:1;  66:8;  98:4,  is 
probably derived from Deuteronomy 32:1, 43. Here the reason for 
such  Gentile  participation  is  the  “lovingkindness”  and  “truth  of 
the LORD,”  V.  2.  In Psalm 47:1-3 the reason is His sovereignty. In 
Psalm  66:8-12  the  reason  is  His  giving  of  life,  His  gracious 
preservation.  In  Psalm  98:1-4  the  reason  is  His  salvation,  His 
“righteousness  in  the  sight  of  the  nations,”  v.  2,  and  His 
lovingkindness and faithfulness before “all the ends of the earth,” 
v. 3. Thus David has a right missionary spirit that would sing the 
words of Frederick W. Faber: 
Souls of men, why will ye scatter 
   Like a crowd of frightened sheep? 
Foolish hearts, why will ye wander 
   From a love so true and deep? 
There’s a wideness in God’s mercy 
   Like the wideness of the sea; 
There’s a kindness in His justice 
   Which is more than liberty 
For the love of God is broader 
   Than the measures of man’s mind, 
And the heart of the Eternal 
   Is most wonderfully kind. 
 
4)  They will hope in the root of Jesse, v. 12. 
 
Here,  with  great  specificity,  is  the  promise  that  the  Gentiles  will 
enter  into  glorious  redemptive  and  millennial  blessing.  While 
Isaiah  11:1-5  describes  Messiah’s  redemptive  kingdom  under 
construct-ion  as  a  result  of  his  first  coming,  so  Isaiah  11:6-9 
reveals  the  consummation  of  this  same  kingdom  at  his  second 
coming.  Thus  Isaiah  11:10  describes  the  substantial  role  that  the 
redeemed  Gentiles  will  have  in  that  glorious  economy  when  “the 
root of Jesse . . . arises to rule over the Gentiles.” As a result, “in 
Him shall the Gentiles hope,” in contrast with their present vanity. 
However, the point is that the Gentiles also will share in the large 
mercy of God, in company with the Jews. 
 
(2)  Christ has provided the ground of mutual hope, v. 13. 
 
“So may the God of hope fill you [Jews and Gentiles]with all joy and peace 
in believing so that you [Jews and Gentiles] will abound in [the same] hope 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.”  The  major  section  commencing  14:1  is 
now brought to an optimistically prayerful conclusion. Even as chapters 9-11 
concluded  with  a  harmonious  resolution  concerning  the  present  tension 
between Jew and Gentile on a broad scale, so here tension of the same kind 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  390
at  a  local  church  level  ends  in  rapprochement  that  unitedly  focuses  on  a 
common hope. The previous quotation of Isaiah 11:10 in v. 12 defined that 
hope whereby Jews and Gentiles shall trust both subjectively and objectively 
in  “the  root  of  Jesse.”  That  is,  the  church  at  Rome  is  to  have  a  heart 
pulsating  confidence  in  the  only  risen,  exalted,  interceding,  reigning  Savior. 
Such a convergence of faith by both the weak and strong, Jew and Gentile, is 
to be upon Christ rather than personal distinctions. Thus Moo is to the point 
in  declaring  that  “Paul’s  ‘bottom  line’  is  the  unity  of  the  church.  .  .  .  this 
unity  is  not  to  be  pursued  at  any  price;  but  Paul  is  adamant  about  not 
allowing  differences  between  believers  about  adiaphora  [indifferent, 
inconsequential  matters,  14:3,  5]  to  injure  the  oneness  of  the  body  of 
Christ.”
73
 
While  exhortation  has  been  specific  regarding  personal  responsibility  in  the 
promotion of unity, 15:1-2, 7, yet there is ultimate recognition of the uniting 
power of the Holy Spirit (John 17:20-21; I Cor. 12:13; Eph. 2:19-22; 4:3-4), 
which  is  very  different  from  formal,  ecumenical  unity.  But  more  than  this, 
Paul’s expectation is for such a fullness of this same Spirit to be productive of 
active  and  reactive  joy  and  peace;  each  believer  becomes  a  spiritual  catalyst 
that  at  the  same  time  generates  cohesion.  So  Henry  Moor,  revised  by  John 
Wesley, has written: 
    Father, if justly still we claim 
       To us and ours the promise made, 
    To us be graciously the same, 
       And crown with living fire our head. 
    Our claim admit, and from above 
       Of holiness the Spirit shower, 
    Of wise discernment, humble love, 
       And zeal, and unity, and power. 
 
 
D.  THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF PAUL AS A GOSPEL MINISTER, 15:14-33. 
 
Here  the  formal  conclusion  of  Romans  1:1-15:13  gently  commences,  and  Morris  sums  up 
the overall preceding context as follows: “Paul’s great treatment of justification has ended. 
He has shown something of its necessity, of what Christ has done to being it about, of the 
necessity of trust in him, of what it means in terms of Jew and Gentile, of the importance of 
living day by day as those who have been justified by faith.”
74
 We move from the Apostle’s 
confidence  that  the  church  at  Rome  will  joyfully  “abound  in  hope  by  the  Holy  Spirit,”  v. 
13, in accord with his distinctive Gentile ministry, to his itinerant plans for what is probably 
a first face-to-face encounter, 1:10-15; 15:24. 
 
1.  The proclamation of Christ to the Gentiles, vs. 14-21. 
 
The self-depreciating ministry of John the Baptist (John 1:23; 3:30) has always been a 
pastoral model, and likewise Paul is of the same temper (I Cor. 3:4-7; I Tim. 1:12-17), 
                                                     
73
  Moo, Romans, p. 883. 
74
  Morris, Romans, p. 508. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  391
although  he  never  undervalues  his  distinctive  calling  through  grace  as  a  trail-blazing 
minister  to  the  Gentiles,  even  at  Rome.  Hence,  with  a  sense  of  responsibility  as  “a 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles,”  v.  16,  according  to  the  following  itinerant 
details,  his  vocational  signature  is  added  in  conclusion  whereby  the  authority  of  his 
preceding exhortation is upheld and sealed. After all, he has “written very boldly . . . 
on some points,” v. 15, especially with regard to a church he did not found. 
 
a.  To Gentiles in Rome, vs. 14-16 
 
Paul’s sense of divine calling to apostolic ministry was very strong, that is he was 
dominated  by  a  distinctly  revealed  missionary  appointment  that  must  be 
accomplished in accord with the mandate of Jesus Christ (Acts 9:15-16). Thus, “I 
do not consider my life of any account as dear to myself, so that I may finish my 
course  [drÒmoj,  dromos,  foot  race]  and  the  ministry  which  I  received  from  the 
Lord Jesus, to testify solemnly of the gospel of the grace of God” (Acts 20:24; cf. 
Phil.  2:17;  II  Tim.  4:6-7).  This  same  intense  commitment  is  indicated  here  as  a 
vocational passion whereby “my offering of the Gentiles may become acceptable, 
sanctified by the Holy Spirit,” v. 16. 
While Paul has made numerous references to gospel ministry that incorporates the 
Gentile as well as the Jew, 1:13-14; 2:8-9, 14-16; 3:29-30; 9:24-26, 30; 11:11-25; 
15:9-12, at this point that he is more specific in mentioning his distinctive calling 
in this respect with regard to it fortifying his forthrightness in communicating the 
truth to the saints at Rome. 
 
(1)  With appreciation of their goodness, v. 14. 
 
“But  I  also  have  become  persuaded  concerning  you  [according  to 
encouraging  reports],  my  brethren,  that  yourselves,  having  become  full  of 
goodness  and  all  knowledge,  are  able  to  admonish  one  another.”  Paul  has 
high  esteem  for  this  congregation  at  Rome,  and  thus  recognizes  a  spiritual 
maturity that not only qualifies to receive his substantial teaching, but is also 
able  to  “admonish,”  nouqetšw,  noutheteo¯ ,  cf.  Acts  20:31;  I  Cor.  4:14;  Col. 
1:28; 3:16; I Thess. 5:12, 14; II Thess. 3:15, itself. Thus with both authority 
and  respectful  tact,  Paul  encourages  these  saints,  as  spiritually  virtuous  and 
doctrinally  mature  brethren,  to  press  on  without  necessary  dependency  on 
himself, and yet anticipation of future fellowship. 
 
(2)  With appreciation of gospel remembrance, v. 15. 
 
“But  I  have  more  boldly/daringly/courageously  [tolmhrotšrwj,  tolme¯
roteros]written to you on some matters so as to be reminding you because 
of  the  grace  that  was  been  given  to  me  from  God.”  What  specifically  are 
these “bold matters”? Let us suggest they would fall within: 
The doctrine of thorough sinful corruption, 3:9-20. 
The doctrine of justification through faith alone. 3:21-4:25. 
The doctrine of sovereign grace in contrast with the law, 5:1-7:25. 
The doctrine of the indwelling Holy Spirit, 8:1-39. 
The doctrine of God’s sovereignty, Jews and Gentiles, 9:1-10:21. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  392
The doctrine of Jewish salvation relative to the Gentiles, 11:1-36. 
The doctrine of Spiritual gifts and fruit in church service, 12:1-21. 
The doctrine of submission to human government, 13:1-7. 
The doctrine of love motivation, 13:8-14. 
The doctrine of the weak and the strong in fellowship, 14:1-15:13. 
But  how  has  this  glorious  repository  of  gospel  truth  come  to  the  fore? 
“Because of the grace that was given [aorist tense]to me from God.” In other 
words,  this  truth  came  by  “revelation  of  Jesus  Christ”  (Gal.  1:12)  to  “a 
chosen instrument” (Acts 9:15) according to being “called [to the apostolic 
office] through His grace” (Gal. 1:15). Paul had a strong sense of Christian 
vocation because of the calling of Christ, and so should every Christian.  
 
(3)  With appreciation of his mandate, v. 16. 
 
When the people of God receive the Word of God from a man of God, it is 
important  that  they  identify  the  personal  medium  of  the  message  as  God’s 
designated  representative.  In  this  world,  ambassadors  are  appointed,  and 
such  an  assignment  brings  with  it  authority  which  validates  the  proclaimed 
message.  So  Paul  continues  to  uphold  his  authorization  to  minister  to  the 
Gentiles,  v.  15,  and  in  so  doing  upholds  his  gospel  message  to  the 
predominantly  Gentile  church  at  Rome  (II  Cor.  2:17;  5:20;  Eph.  6:19-20). 
Note  the  economic  relations  of  the  three  Persons  of  the  Trinity  with  regard 
to the work pf redemption, which truth will be repeated in vs. 17-19. 
This verse is full of Jewish sacrificial language. The message of Romans has 
come  through  the  medium  of  Paul,  “a  minister  [leitourgÒj,  leitourgos]  of 
Christ  Jesus  to  the  Gentiles,”  which  service  more  distinctively  refers  to  an 
office,  especially  that  of  priestly  service  as  subsequently  described  (cf.  Heb. 
8:1-2).
75
  However  this  service  is  to  be  an  offering  of  the  Roman  Gentiles  to 
God;  Paul  perceives  his  missionary  labors  as  a  presentation,  an  offering  of 
the  fruits  of  his  evangelistic  toiling  (II  Cor.  11:2;  Col.  1:22,  28;  I  Thess. 
2:19). Thus his Jewish roots are evident as he portrays, in a priestly manner 
with the instrument of the gospel of God, the Gentile believers in Rome as an 
acceptable  “offering,”  prosfor£,  prosphora  (cf.  Acts  21:26;  Heb.  10:5)  to 
God with the authenticating, consecrating “sweet incense” of the Holy Spirit. 
For this reason Paul describes himself as “priesting it,” ƒerougew, hierougeo¯ , 
present  participle;  he  serves  God  seeking  authentic  fruit  and  His  approval, 
not  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  man’s  estimate of  his  ministry  (  I  Cor.  4:2-4];  he 
has  no  thought  of  recognition  by  man  with  the  title  of  “priest;”  by  way  of 
illustration, Paul describes himself as offering the Gentiles to God, not Christ 
as in the Roman Catholic mass. 
John  Stott  adds:  “Although  Paul’s  priestly  ministry  as  an  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles  was  unique,  the  principle  he  enunciates  has  a  vital  contemporary 
application.  All  evangelists  are  priests,  because  they  offer  their  converts  to 
God.”
76
 
                                                     
75
  R. C. Trench, Synonyms of the New Testament, pp. 125-7. 
76
  Stott, Romans, p. 379. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  393
b.  To Gentiles from Jerusalem to Illyricum, vs. 17-19. 
 
As a faithful ambassador boasts not in himself or the significance of his office, but 
rather  in  his  lord  and  master,  so  Paul,  having  expounded  upon  “the  grace  that 
was given me from God,” v. 15, is more eager to focus upon the glorious “things” 
of  God  the  Father,    His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  Anne  Cousin 
has written: 
The bride eyes not her garment, 
   But her dear bridegroom’s face; 
I will not gaze are glory, 
   But on my King of grace, 
Not at the crown He giveth, 
   But on His pierced hand: 
The Lamb is all the glory 
   Of Immanuel’s land. 
 
(1)  Boasting in God, v. 17. 
 
“Therefore  I  have  [my]  boasting  in  Christ  Jesus  [concerning]  the  things  [of 
my service] before God [the Father].” This is reminiscent of Galatians 6:14. 
Thus  Paul’s  ministry  style,  notwithstanding  being  “a  chosen  instrument” 
(Acts  9:15),  is  defined  as  being  driven  by  God-centeredness,  not 
utilitarianism;  God  is  not  a  means  to  an  end,  namely  the  enhancement  of 
Paul’s  ministry,  but  rather  a  glorious  end  in  Himself.  There  may  be  here  a 
slight  inference  concerning  evident success  with  regard  to a  host  of  Gentiles 
turning  to  Christ,  such  as  at  Rome.  Nevertheless,  Paul  will  only  ascribe 
praise to God for such fruitfulness (I Cor. 3:5-7). 
 
(2)  Boasting in Christ’s accomplishments, v. 18. 
 
“For I will not dare to speak of anything except what Christ [God the Son] 
has  accomplished/effectively  worked  out  [,  katergazomai] 
through me resulting in the obedience [of faith, 1:5; 16:25-26] of the Gentiles 
by  [the]  word  and  work  [of  Paul].”  Who  would  deny  the  tireless  zeal  and 
dogged persistence of Paul for the cause of Christ (II Cor. 11:21-33), yet the 
Apostle  insists  it  must  all  subsume  under  divine  enablement.  His  ministry 
“by  word  and  work,”  lÒgwÄ   kaˆ  œrgw,  logo¯   kai  ergo¯   (II  Cor.  10:11;  Col. 
3:17;  II  Thess.  2:17),  both  preaching,  teaching,  and  tent-making,  traveling, 
was accomplished only through grace, not human ingenuity, as the preceding 
and following context suggests. Thus Paul, as a “fellow worker,” built upon 
“Jesus  Christ”  as  the  only  foundation  so  that  “God’s  building”  resulted, 
being identifiable as “gold, silver, precious stones” (I Cor. 3:9-12). 
Elsewhere in Romans Paul has revealed his fervent concern for the Jew (1:16; 
9:1-5;  10:1-2;  11:1);  yet  here  his  desire  that,  according  to  divine 
commissioning,  the  Gentiles  might  savingly  believe  is  equally  a  consuming 
passion, even as his hoped for visit to Rome and Spain indicates, v. 24. 
 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  394
(3)  Boasting in the power of the Spirit, v. 19. 
 
“In  the  power  of  [miraculous]  signs  and  wonders,  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit.”  The  more  spectacular  features  of  Paul’s  apostolic  ministry,  that  was 
void  of  spectacular  claims,  also  derived  from  the  power  of  Christ,  are  now 
described,  being  shme…wn  kaˆ  ter£twn,  semeio¯ n  kai  terato¯ n.  Both  are 
supernatural  manifestations,  with  a  sign  stressing  significance  and  a  wonder 
stressing  astonishing,  powerful  display.  In  II  Corinthians  12:11-12  Paul 
indicates to the believers in Corinth that, “in no respect was I inferior to the 
most  eminent  apostles,  even  though  I  am  a  nobody.  The  signs  [shme‹a,         
se¯ meia]  of  a  true  apostle  were  performed  among  you  with  all  perseverance, 
by  signs  [shme…oij,  se¯meiois]  and  wonders  [tšrasin,  terasin]  and  miracles 
[dun£mesin,  dunamesin].”  As  Jesus  performed  “miracles  and  wonders  and 
signs”  (Acts  2:22),  so  did  the  apostles  (Acts  5:12),  and  Paul  in  particular 
(Acts  13:6-12;  14:3,  8-10;  15:12;  16:16-18;  19:11-12;  20:9-12),  whereby 
their foundational role in church of Jesus Christ was signified (Matt. 16:18-
19;  Eph.  2:19-22;  Heb.  2:3-4).  In  contrast  “the  man  of  lawlessness  .  .  .  the 
son of destruction,” will manifest “the activity of Satan, with all power and 
signs and false wonders” (II Thess. 2:3, 9). 
The geographic extent of Christ’s accomplishment through Paul is described 
as, “from Jerusalem and round about as far as Illyricum [on the eastern coast 
of  the  Adriatic  Sea].”  Here  are  the  broad  limits,  thus  far,  of  his  outreach  to 
the  Gentiles  in  which  he  “fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ,”  that  is 
completed  his  aforeplanned  itinerary  for  establishing  the  gospel  in  new 
territory. 
 
c.  To Gentiles in unevangelized fields, vs. 20-21. 
 
Paul’s  understanding  of  his  commission,  according  to  Christ’s  specification,  was 
that he be a church planter in virgin Gentile regions that excluded the necessity of 
building on an earlier witness (I Cor. 3:6-10; II Cor. 10:13-16). However, others 
were certainly expected to build upon what Paul had planted. Thus he was to lay 
solid foundations that did not require adjustment (I Cor. 3:10-15). 
 
(1)  Laying a fresh foundation, v. 20. 
 
It was Paul’s custom to first make contact with any Jews he could discover in 
new  Gentile  territory,  according  to  1:16,  who  would  certainly  have  some 
Messianic hope (Acts 16:12-13; 17:1-3, 10, 16-17; 18:1-4, 19). However he 
sought unevangelized  regions  where  the  good news  of  the Lord Jesus as  the 
Christ was not embraced. His attitude was that of “striving with fondness,” 
filotimšomai,  philotimeomai,  to  “preach  the  gospel/evangelize,” 
eÙaggel…zomai,  euangelizomai,  in  fresh  fields.  Knowing  he  could  encounter 
situations where Christ had been preached “from envy and strife . . . selfish 
ambition . . . pretense” (Phil. 1:15-18), knowing he would have to deal with 
“wood,  hay,  straw”  (I  Cor.  3:12),  Paul  preferred  to  build  on  a  solid 
foundation,  that  is  the  unsullied  truth  of  Christ  crucified  (I  Cor.  3:11);  he 
believed  that  subsequent  builders  of  the  superstructure,  that  is  “waterers” 
such as Apollos would, with caution, do better this way (I Cor. 3:6, 10). 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  395
(2)  Laying a fulfilled foundation, v. 21. 
 
As  proof  of  this  distinctive  ministry,  Paul  quotes  Isaiah  52:15b.  Moo  gives 
three reasons for this.  
First, it justifies Paul’s decision not ‘to build on another’s foundations,’ v. 20; 
for the text speaks of bringing a message to those who have not heard. Second, 
it accords with Paul’s sense of calling to the Gentiles, since the ones who have 
not had it announced to them and have not yet heard are ‘kings’ and ‘nations,’ 
cf. v. 15a. Third, it alludes to the content of Paul’s gospel. For Isaiah 52:15 is 
part  of  the  famous  fourth  ‘servant’  passage,  and  the  ‘him’  concerning  whom 
these Gentiles have not been told is the Servant of the Lord [Messiah].
77
 
 
2.  The proclamation of fellowship amongst the Gentiles, vs. 22-29. 
 
While  Paul  has  just  declared  his  priority,  “I  would  not  build  on  another  man’s 
foundation,”  yet  this  did  not  restrict  him  from  visiting  churches  he  did  not  plant, 
though only when his primary calling allowed. Rome is a case in point, 1:13.  
 
a.  Itinerantly in preaching, vs. 22-25. 
 
It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  substance  of  this  epistle  is  that  which  Paul 
longs  to  communicate  by  means  of  his  personal  presence.  While  v.  20  has 
described  his  primary  commitment  to  evangelize  the  unevangelized  Gentiles,  we 
must  recall  the  similar  intent  of  1:15:  “I  am  eager  to  preach  the  gospel 
[eÙaggel…zomaieuangelizomai]  to  you  also  who  are  in  Rome.”  Thus  in  Rome 
Paul will evangelize the evangelized, for the purpose of sanctification. 
 
(1)  With delays, v. 22. 
 
Thus  the  itinerant  ministry  from  Jerusalem  to  Illyricum  has,  on  many 
occasions, hindered or “cut in,” ™gkÒptw, enkopto¯ , to Paul’s long term plans 
for visiting Rome. Thus the spiritual birthing and building process, according 
to  the  specific  divine  job  description,  must  prevail  over  other  personal 
preferences. 
 
(2)  With desires, v. 23. 
 
“But  now,”  nunˆ  dš,  nuni  de,  cf.  3:21;  6:22;  7:6;  11:30,  suggests  a  strong 
anticipation  of  changed  circumstances.  In  most  likely  writing  from  Corinth, 
Paul  intimates  that  since  his  regional  ministry  there  has  now  concluded,  his 
longing over many years to visit Rome may now be fulfilled. 
 
(3)  With design, v. 24. 
 
“As  I  go  to  Spain  [Span…a,Spania]—  ”  is  an  anacolutha,  the  end  of  an 
incomplete sentence. Morris gives some evidence, including the comment of 
                                                     
77
  Moo, Romans, pp. 897-8. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  396
Clement  of  Rome  toward  the  end  of  the  first  century,  that  Paul  did 
eventually visit Spain,
78
 though there is no evidence in Scripture.  
A  sudden  change  of  thought  results  in  a  more  narrow  focus  on  a  resultant 
passing  visit  to  Rome.  Paul  first  anticipates  the  enjoyment  of  Christian 
fellowship  there  in  transit,  and  consequent  “help,”  propšmpw,  propempo¯ , 
meaning material missionary support such as food, clothing, money, etc. cf. 
vs. 26-27; I Cor. 16:6; II Cor. 1:16; Tit. 3:13. 
 
(4)  With dedication, v. 25. 
 
“But  now  [again  nunˆ  dš,  nuni  de]  I  am  going  to  Jerusalem  serving  the 
saints.” The train of thought in v. 23 is now picked up and modified. For all 
of  his  concern  for  vital  doctrine,  Paul  never  lost  sight  of  material  and 
physical  needs,  and  especially  with  regard  to  the  church  at  Jerusalem 
impoverished  through  persecution  (Acts  8:1;  24:17;  I  Cor.  16:1-3;  II  Cor. 
8:1-9:15). Further he goes “deaconing,” diakonîn, diakono¯ n, ministering to 
the  believers,  not  regarding  himself  as  above  such  menial  assistance,  on  the 
grounds of Acts 6:1-6. 
 
b.  Practically in substance, vs. 26-27. 
 
While it is declared that Paul will deliver material aid to the impoverished saints at 
Jerusalem,  there  seems  to  be  an  ongoing  and  dominant  interest  in  the  “mother 
church” located in the city of great David’s greater Son. 
 
(1)  For the support of Jerusalem, v. 26. 
 
“For Macedonia and Arhaia were well pleased to make/contribute fellowship 
[koinwn…a,  koin¯ onia]  for  the  poor  amongst  the  saints  in  Jerusalem.”  Both 
Macedonia  (northern  Greece)  and  Achaia  (southern  Greece)  are  here 
understood  as  Gentile  regions,  even  though  Paul’s  ministry  at  Philippi, 
Thessalonica, Berea, Corinth, and Athens involved initial contact with Jews; 
in  contrast  “the  saints  in  Jerusalem”  represent  the  Jewish  mother  church, 
where  the  apostles  remained,  Acts  8:1,  that  is  rooted  in  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob, David, and Jesus Christ. This “fellowship” was surely material aid (I 
Cor.  16:1-3;  II  Cor.  8:1-4;  9:1-15)  that  resulted  from  Paul’s  faithfulness  to 
the apostolic admonition of Galatians 2:9-10.  
 
(2)  For the reason of indebtedness, v. 27. 
 
“For [as I have already said] they [the Greek Gentiles] were well pleased [in 
their sharing], and they are debtors to them [the Jerusalem Christians]; for if 
the  Gentiles  have  shared  in  their  spiritual  [blessings/roots],  they  are  also 
indebted  to  serve  them  by  means  of  material  [blessings].”  The  Gentile 
response  has  been  spontaneous,  not  reluctant;  they  have  probably  been 
taught by Paul that their roots are found in Jerusalem, the capital of Judaism, 
                                                     
78
  Morris, Romans, p. 518n. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  397
1:16; 9:4-5; they have entered into the “spiritual [pneumatikÒj, pneumatikos] 
blessings”  that  are  inherited  by  those  belonging  to  Christ,  thus  they  “are 
Abraham’s  descendants,  heirs  according  to  promise”  (Gal.  3:29).  Hence 
using a fortiori reasoning, how much more ought the Gentiles respond with 
“material [sarkikÒj, sarkikos] blessings.” Moo rightly comments: 
Paul alludes here to a central theological theme of the letter: that the salvation 
enjoyed  by  the  Gentiles  comes  only  by  way  of  the  Jewish  Messiah  and  the 
fulfillment of promises made to Israel (1:16; 4:13-16; 11:17-24; 15:7-8). There 
is  a  sense  in  which  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  new  age  belong  especially  to 
the  Jewish  Christians;  and  Gentile  Christians  should  acknowledge  and  give 
thanks for their ‘sharing’ of these blessings with them. And it is by ‘serving’ the 
Jewish  Christians  with  ‘material  things’  that  the  Gentiles  can  express  their 
sense of indebtedness and thanksgiving.
79
   
 
c.  Eventually in Rome, vs. 28-29. 
 
It is significant that Paul believes he must make personal delivery of the combined 
contributions of the Gentiles, and not by means of a courier, cf. 16:1-2. 
 
(1)  Via Spain, v. 28. 
 
The delivery of the Gentile contributions to the saints at Jerusalem seems to 
have  the  aura  of  a  personal  task  for  Paul  that  must  be  brought  to 
completion.  Thus  he  is  making  a  personal  appearance,  literally  to  “seal  to 
them  [the  Gentiles]  this  fruit,”  that  is  ensure  safe  delivery,  but  even  more, 
communicate  to  Jewish  Christians  that  this  offering  comes  from  Gentile 
Christians via the apostle to the Gentiles. Such a witness would only all the 
more  establish  the  universal  character  of  the  gospel  and  thus  confirm  the 
truth of Acts 15:11; Gal. 2:9-10. 
 
(2)  Via the blessing of Christ, v. 29. 
 
“For I know [in a full sense
80
] that coming to you, I will come in [bringing] 
the fullness of Christ’s blessing.” Whereas Paul has been restricted in coming 
to Rome to date, according to divine vocation and circumstances, vs. 22-23, 
his  eventual  arrival  shall  be  with  divine  blessing  that  can  be  happily 
anticipated; in v. 32 this delight is similarly described as “joy by the will of 
God  .  .  .  [and]  rest  in  your  company.”  His  expectation  concerns  what  God 
will  do  rather  than  what  he  will  accomplish  (I  Cor.  15:9-10),  and  that 
though he eventually comes as a prisoner (Acts 28:16, 30-31). Possibly after 
two years in Rome he was able to visit Spain with the same hope of bringing 
with him “the fullness of Christ’s blessing.” 
 
 
 
                                                     
79
  Moo, Romans, p. 905. 
80
  This  is  probably  the  sense  of  o•da,  oida  here,  cf.  7:14,  rather  than  ginèskw,  gin¯ osk¯ o,  7:1;  cf.  the  contrast 
between these two words in John 8:55. So Shedd, Romans, p. 29. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  398
3.  The promotion of prayer for his ministry, vs. 30-33. 
 
Romans  has  now  come  to  its  substantial  conclusion.  Paul  still  contemplates  his 
announced itinerary, except that he earnestly solicits fellowship in prayer on account of 
anticipated opposition in Jerusalem at the conclusion of his third missionary journey. 
 
a.  He calls for prayer, vs. 30-32. 
 
Paul  commonly  calls  for  fellowship  in  prayer  in  his  epistles  (II  Cor.  1:11;  Eph. 
6:18-19; Col. 4:2-3; I Thess. 5:25; II Thess. 3:1), except that here there is a note 
of  urgency  and  specificity.  The  journey  to  Rome  is  via  Jerusalem,  and  thus 
expected  hostility  from  opponents  of  the  gospel,  based  on  Paul’s  former 
experience, is a matter concerning which the Christians at Rome should intercede 
with God about. 
 
(1)  That is earnest in the Spirit, v. 30. 
 
“So I exhort/urge you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through 
the  love  of  the  Spirit,  to  strive  together  with  me  in  prayers  on  my  behalf 
before  God.”  This  uncommon  invocation  of  the  full  name  of  Paul’s  Master 
in  prayer  reflects  his  apostolic  authority,  that  is  the  effectual  ground  by 
which Paul prays concerning an important matter; at the same time it is to be 
the identical ground upon which the prayers of the Roman believers should 
rest  upon.  In  a  similar  way  “the  love  of  the  Spirit”  is  appealed  to  which 
could be the Spirit’s love for the saints, or the love of the Saints for the Spirit, 
or  most  likely  that  love  which  the  Spirit  generates  and  is  employed  in 
heartfelt concern for Paul’s travels. The apostle does not want token interest, 
but that which unites with him in entreaty before God with loving passion. 
 
(2)  That brings deliverance and blessing, v. 31. 
 
What  is  it  that  causes  Paul  to  be  so  concerned  about  his  safety  in  Judea 
concerning  those  who  are  “disobedient,”  or  “unbelieving/unpersuaded,” 
¢peiqšw,  apeitheo¯ ,  obviously  with  regard  to  the  gospel  that  has  been 
proclaimed?  First,  there  is  past  experience;  following  his  conversion,  by 
revelation of Jesus Christ in Jerusalem, Paul is told, “Make haste, and get out 
of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your testimony about me” 
(Acts  22:18);  at  the  Council  at  Jerusalem  following  his  first  missionary 
journey,  there  was  opposition  from  “the  sect  of  the  Pharisees”  (Acts  15:5); 
after  the  second  missionary  journey,  Paul  “went  up  and  greeted  the  church 
[at  Jerusalem
81
]  (Acts  18:22).  There  is  also  further  divine  revelation  of 
prospective  “bonds  and  afflictions”  (Acts  20:22-23;  21:4,  11-12),  which 
proves to be all too true (Acts 21:27-36).  
Second,  Paul  reveals  his  future  hope  that,  “my  service  [diakon…a  diakonia] 
for  Jerusalem  may  prove  acceptable  to  the  saints.”  Thus  personal 
presentation  is  of  vital  importance,  but  especially  so  that  “favorable 
acceptance,”  eÙprÒsdektoj,  euprosdektos,  cf.  v.  16,  might  result.  It  is  as  if 
                                                     
81
 F. F. Bruce, The Acts of the Apostles, p. 350. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESPONSIBILITIES  399
Paul’s delivery of material benevolence from the Gentile churches is the QED 
and signature that upholds his distinctive apostolic vocation, and thus ought 
to  cause  conservative  legalists  to  rethink  their  exclusive  ways.  Probably 
Paul’s  ultimate  goal  at  this  juncture  is  peace  and  unity  in  the  church  at 
Jerusalem on the grounds of the universal gospel. 
 
(3)  That brings direction to Rome, v. 32. 
 
Beyond  Jerusalem,  Paul  fervently  prays  that,  “having  come  to  you  in  joy 
through the will of God, I may have refreshing [spiritual] rest with you all.” 
Personal  eagerness  must  yield  to  the  divine  plan  that  hopefully  will  not 
include restriction through militant opposition in Jerusalem; yet personal and 
detailed  supplication  is  in  no  way  negated.  Here  there  is  anticipation  of 
blessing in unity, even as the overall thrust of the Epistle to Romans conveys, 
though  in  contrast  with  I  Corinthians  and  Galatians.  Haldane  well 
comments: 
From this we may learn that if even on God’s errand we  have need of  prayer 
for  success  in  our  journey,  how  much  more  do  we  have  need  of  prayer  for 
success in our own daily business! So much does God encourage the exercise of 
prayer,  that  He  wills  us  to  pray  for  success  when  we  do  His  own  work.  The 
whole  passage,  also,  is  the  strongest  refutation  of  the  theory  of  those  who 
suppose  that  prayer  is  useless,  because  of  the  unchangeable  purposes  of  God. 
The  express  command  of  the  Spirit  of  inspiration  annihilates  all  the  subtle 
speculations of men on this subject. We here see that it is not only lawful and 
proper to pray to the unchangeable God, but that it is our duty to pray to Him 
to prosper us even in His own work.
82
 
 
b.  He concludes with prayer, v. 33. 
 
“May the God of peace be with you all. Amen.” While it is correct to declare God 
to  be  at  peace  with  Himself,  even  in  the  Triune  relationships,  yet  here  the 
emphasis  would  be  upon  that  peace  which  comes  from  God,  14:17;  15:13, 
through Christ, that establishes our hearts with peace in contrast with conflict due 
to sin. However, even such peace associated with a Christian needs qualification, 
as Morris states with relation to the context of this same expression in 16:20.  
The  New  Testament  writers  tended  to  take  their  idea  of  peace  from  the  Old 
Testament,  and  for  the  Hebrews  peace  (shalom)  was  a  positive  idea  [not  simply 
negative as the exclusion of war], the idea of wholeness, of well-roundedness. It was 
the prosperity of the whole life, a positive and not a negative idea.
83
 
Thus  the  exclamatory  “Amen/let  it  be  so,”  ¢m»n,  ame¯n,  defines  Paul’s  ultimate 
hope, namely the executed will of God in all of these matters through the lives of 
himself and the fellowship of the saints (Heb. 13:20-21). 
                                                     
82
  Haldane, Romans, pp. 639-40. 
83
  Morris, Romans, p. 541. 
CHAPTER XV 
 
ROMANS 16:1-24 - FAREWELL GREETINGS IN 
THE GOSPEL 
 
 
OME scholars are of the opinion that this chapter is not part of the original epistle of Paul to 
the  saints  at  Rome.  There  is  further  disagreement  as  to  the  position  and  inclusion  of  the 
concluding doxology, vs. 25-27. While there are manuscript variances that may suggest the Old 
Testament antipathy of Marcionism against the five quotations of chapter 15, and perhaps Paul’s 
later  addition  of  chapter  16,  and  thus  the  variant  positioning  of  the  doxology  of  vs.  25-27,  yet 
the  overwhelming  belief  is  that  Romans  15-16  was  authored  by  Paul  and  that  Romans  1-16  as 
we  have  it  was  the  epistle  that  Phoebe  most  likely  delivered.
1
  There  are  nineteen  men  and  nine 
women  who  are  addressed  in  Rome  while  those  sending  greetings,  probably  from  Corinth,  are 
nine  men  and  one  woman,  including  Phoebe and Paul. Overall  they  are  Latin and  Greek, while 
perhaps six are Jewish;
2
 this would add weight to the probability that Paul addresses the church 
at Rome as being predominantly Gentile. Assuming that Paul has not previously been to Rome, 
his  familiarity  here  with  so  many  saints  suggests  his  direct  meeting  with  many  of  them  in  his 
missionary travels, or through earlier correspondence. Indeed, it is quite possible that within the 
hearts  of  those  specified  in  receiving  greetings  there  resides  the  core  reasons  for  the  doctrinal 
thrust that the Apostle makes, cf. 1:7, 15. 
We  commence  with  an  intensely  personal  catalog  of  greetings  that  focuses  on  real  first  century 
Christians in Rome, often menially employed, who are not theologians and academics but rather 
a tolerated yet threatened minority. Nevertheless, they penetrated “the whole praetorian guard” 
and “Caesar’s household” (Phil. 1:13; 4:22).
3
 In a world void of the cable, telephone, and email, 
imagine  the  intense  interest  at  the reading  of  such  an  epistle;  even  as  we  are  accustomed  today, 
most likely this signature chapter was read first! 
 
 
A.  THE COMMENDATION OF PHOEBE, VS. 1-2. 
 
  In  our  contemporary  world  where  the  Christian  church  has  been  influenced  by  the  secular 
feminist movement, especially with regard to the appointment of women as spiritual leaders 
in  local  church  life,  considerable  though  exaggerated  attention  has  been  given  to  the  role 
here of Phoebe who was most likely the courier for this epistle. 
 
1.  She is a servant of the church, v. 1. 
 
Phoebe,  Fo…bh,  Phoibe ¯,  a  name  of  Greek  pagan  derivation,  herself  probably  being  a 
Gentile, originated from Cenchrea, a seaport situated eight miles south-east of Corinth. 
In  this  region  Paul  had  earlier  resided  for  eighteen  months  and  probably  founded  the 
church at that coastal town (Acts 18:1-18). The grounds of commendation are first that 
                                              
1
  Moo, Romans, pp. 5-9. 
2
  The Jews would include Prisca and Aquila, Mary, and kinsmen, Andronicas, Junias, and Herodion. 
3
  D.  A.  Carson,  Douglas  J.  Moo,  and  Leon  Morris,  An  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,  p.  319.  The 
traditional opinion has remained that Philippians was written in Rome by imprisoned Paul.  
S 
FAREWELL GREETINGS IN THE GOSPEL 
 
401
she is a “sister”, ¢delf», adelphe ¯, a spiritual kindred spirit (I Cor. 7:15; 9:5; Jas. 2:15; 
Philem.  2).  Second  she  is  a  “servant/deacon”,  di£konoj,  diakonos,  of  the  church.  In      
I  Timothy  3:  11,  cf.  v.  8,  there  is  the  likelihood  that  the  office  of  “deaconess”  is 
intended, and so probably here.
4
 Moule explains that Phoebe was,  
very  probably  a  person  of  substance  and  influence.—There  is  good  evidence  of  the 
existence in the Apostles’ time of an organized class of female helpers in sacred work. . . . 
Just after the apostolic age the famous Letter of Pliny to Trajan indicates that such female 
helpers (ministræ) were known in the Bithynian Churches; and for two centuries from the 
time of Tertullian (cir. A.D. 210) allusions to them are frequent, and show that they were 
largely employed both in the relief of temporal distress, chiefly among women, and also in 
the  elementary  teaching  of  female  catechumens.  They  were  regularly  set  apart  by 
imposition of hands. As a rule, they were required to be of mature age, (rarely of less than 
40  years,)  and  in  most  cases  they  appear  to  have  been  widows  and  mothers.  By  the  12
th
 
century the Order had been everywhere abolished. . . . We must not assume that Phoebe 
was a deaconess in the full later sense of the word; but that her position was analogous to 
that of the later deaconesses seems at least most probable.
5
  
Of course it is obvious that such appointments would be according to the elders as the 
spiritual overseers of a local church. All in all, it is abundantly clear that Paul, as here, 
was  tenderly  appreciative  of  those  women  who  supplemented  his  ministry  (Phil.  4:3), 
even as the following verse confirms. 
 
2.  She is to be served by the church, v. 2. 
 
So  the  “saints”  or  holy/sanctified  ones  are  to  “receive  /welcome”  Phoebe  “in  the 
Lord,”  (cf.  vs.  8,  11,  12,  13,  22,  and  “in  Christ,”  vs.  3,  7,  9,  10),  offering  whatever 
practical help is necessary since “she herself” (emphatic) is a “helper.” Here prost£tij, 
prostatis, describes a “protectress.” “It is a word of dignity, evidently chosen instead of 
others which might have been used, . . . and indicates the high esteem with which she 
was regarded, as one who had been a protectress of many. Prostate ¯s was the title of a 
citizen in Athens, who had the responsibility of seeing to the welfare of resident aliens 
who  were  without  civic  rights.  Among  the  Jews  it  signified  a  wealthy  patron  of  the 
community.”
6
  Thus  the  biblical  order  of  a  hierarchical  relationship  between  Christian 
men and women (I Cor. 11:3, 7-12; Eph. 5:22-28) in no way diminishes the esteem and 
respect that is to be lavished upon those in subordinate positions. 
 
 
B.  THE GREETINGS TO THE SAINTS, VS. 3-16. 
 
1.  To the household of Prisca and Aquila, vs. 3-5a. 
 
In  c.  49-50  A.D,  the  Roman  emperor  Claudius  issued  an  edict  that  evicted  all  Jews 
from Rome on account of supposed rioting. Two of the refugees who fled were Aquila, 
                                              
4
  Pro are:  Alford,  Chrysostom,  Haldane, Lenski,  Luther,  Moo,  Morris,  Moule, Stott;  contra are:  Hendriksen, 
Murray. 
5
  H. C. G. Moule, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans, pp. 245-6. 
6
  W.  E.  Vine,  Merrill  F.  Unger,  and  William  White,  Jr.,  Vine’s  Expository  Dictionary  of  Biblical  Words,  p. 
607. Also Moo, Romans, p. 530, who rightly infers that Phoebe traveled with a “retinue of servants.” 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
402
originally  from  Pontus  in  Asia  Minor  (Acts  2:9;  I  Pet.  1:1),  and  his  wife  Prisca
7
  who 
had,  as  was  common,  taken  Roman  names.  Settling  in  Corinth  as  profitable  tent-
makers, there they met another tent-maker, the Apostle Paul, in the midst of his second 
missionary journey (Acts 18:1-3). It is likely that on account of this trade association, 
Paul witnessed to the devoted couple with the result being their conversion.
8
 Thus they 
accompany  the  Apostle  to  Ephesus  and  there  evidence  spiritual  capability  in  giving 
necessary  instruction  to  Apollos  (Acts  18:26).  By  the  time  of  Paul’s  return  to  Corinth 
during  his  third  missionary  journey,  Prisca  and  Aquila  have  apparently  returned  to 
Rome on account of the former edict being rescinded, though now they are significant 
members of the church that meets in their home, to which Paul presently writes. 
 
a.  Paul’s fellow-workers, v. 3. 
 
“Greet”  or  “convey  respectful  regards,”  ¢sp£zomai,  aspazomai,  signifies  a 
salutation, a friendly personal acknowledgment, which term is used 16 times in vs. 
3-16.  That  the  order  of  “Aquila  and  Priscilla”  (  Acts  18:2;  I  Cor.  16:19))  is 
changed  to  “Priscilla  and  Aquila”  (Acts  18:18,  26;  II  Tim.  4:19),  whether  with 
reference  to  a  dominant  personality  or  social  status,  is  speculative.  The  primacy 
here given to this choice couple is intentional and supported by the length of the 
greeting.  As  “fellow  workers  [sunergoÚj,sunergous]  in  Christ  Jesus,”  they  had 
mediated  the  truth  of  the  gospel  that  had  been  so  well  imparted  to  them  in 
Corinth  and  Ephesus.  Perhaps  through  previous  correspondence,  they  had 
conveyed  much  detail  about  the  church  in  Rome,  even  with  regard  to  many 
trophies of grace that Paul now mentions, such as Mary, v. 6. 
 
b.  Paul’s fellow-rescuers, v. 4. 
 
“Who, on behalf of my life [soul], offered their own neck as it were in execution 
[for  my  deliverance].”  Identification  of  this  heroic  exploit  is  difficult  to  identify, 
even if it was widely acknowledged. Most likely it is the danger that Paul faced in 
Ephesus (I Cor. 15:32; Acts 19:23-32; 20:1), which ministry spread through Asia 
Minor  (Acts  19:10).  So  Paul  declares  that,  “to  whom  not  only  do  I  give  thanks, 
but also the churches of the Gentiles.” As Frederick Faber has written: 
    Our fathers, chained in prisons dark, 
       Were still in heart and conscience free; 
    And blest would be their children’s fate, 
       Though they, like them, should die for thee. 
Indeed, humanly speaking, if it were not for this courageous couple, then not only 
Romans,  but  also  Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  Philemon,  I  &  II  Timothy, 
and Titus would not have been written! 
 
 
 
 
                                              
7
  “Prisca,”  Pr…ska  (I  Cor.  16:19;  II  Tim.  4:19),  according  to  Paul,  is  the  basic  or  proper  name  while 
“Priscilla,” Pr…skilla (Acts 18:2, 18, 26), according to Luke, is a derivative form. 
8
  W. J. Connybeare and J. S. Howson, The Life and Epistles of Saint Paul, p. 337. 
FAREWELL GREETINGS IN THE GOSPEL 
 
403
c.  Paul’s fellow-worshipers, v. 5a.- 
 
Perhaps  the  return  of  Aquila  and  Prisca  to  Rome  enabled  them  to  reclaim  their 
property that included a house suitable for church fellowship, as was their custom 
formerly  in  Ephesus  (Acts  18:26;  I  Cor.  16:8,  19).  Here,  implicit  material 
prosperity while perhaps childless, may have enabled not only frequent travel, but 
also  investment  in  evangelistic  ministry  that  resulted  in  heavenly  consequences 
(Luke 16:9). 
 
2.  To the fellowship in particular, vs. 5b-15. 
 
Here  then  are  the  members  and  adherents  of  the  church  at  the  home  of  Prisca  and 
Aquila, which house church movement was the norm: “There were no church buildings 
in  the  first  century  (not  until  the  third  century  on  our  present  information),”
9
  though 
Paul readily employed “the school of Tyrannus” at Ephesus over a two year period for 
evangelistic meetings (Acts 19:9-10).
10
 
 
a.  Beloved, ¢gaphtÒj, agape¯tos Epaenetus, Ampliatus, and Stachys v. 5b, 8, 9b. 
 
Epaenetus,  originating  from  Asia  (Ephesus?),  had  probably  met  Paul  and  as  a 
consequence  become  “my  beloved,”  who  then  joined  the  winsome  couple  when 
they returned to the imperial city. His being “the first fruit [¢parc», aparche ¯, cf. 
8:23] to Christ from Asia,” probably designates him as the first convert of Paul in 
Ephesus  that  was  followed  by  a  substantial  harvest.  As  such  he  learned  and 
matured  over  two  years  under  Paul’s  tutelage  to  the  point  of  being  significantly 
used  in  missionary  service.  Ampliatus,  has  been  associated  with  freedmen,  also 
Caesar’s household, as with Stachys meaning “wheat ear” (Matt. 12:1).
11
 
 
b.  Hardworking, kopi£w, kopiao, Mary, Tryphaena, Tryphosa, and Persis, vs. 6, 12. 

While Mary, probably Jewish from Miriam, has personally “toiled much” poll¦ 
™kop…asen,polla ekopiasen, for Prisca and Aquila, and likewise Persis has “toiled 
much,”  so  Tryphaena  and  Tryphosa,  perhaps  sisters  meaning  “Delicate  and 
Dainty,”
12
 have “toiled,”, kopi£w, kopiao, worked with weariness “in the Lord.” 
What exactly was this hard employment? The word used here elsewhere describes 
physical  (Luke  5:5;  Eph.  4:28;  I  Cor.  4:12)  as  well  as  spiritual  (Phil.  2:16;  Col. 
1:28-29; I Tim. 5:17) labor, and most likely both meanings are intended here, but 
especially in the face of vigorous opposition. 
 
c.  Kinsmen, suggen»j, sungene ¯s, Andronicus, Junia(s), and Herodion, vs. 7, 11a.  
 
“Kinsmen”  suggests  these  were  Jews,  cf.  9:3.  Most  likely  Andronicus  and  Junia 
(feminine) were husband and wife, though their being called “apostles” has led to 
                                              
9
  Morris, Romans, p. 532. 
10
  One manuscript adds at the end of v. 9, “from 11 A.M. to 4 p.m.” F. F. Bruce, The Acts of the Apostles, p. 
356. 
11
  J. B. Lightfoot, St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians, p. 174. 
12
  Moo, Romans, p. 925; Morris, Romans, p. 536. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
404
controversy  since earlier  commentators  could  not  accept  this  as  appropriate  for a 
woman.  Hence  later  commentators  have  preferred  Junias  (masculine).  However 
more  recent  agreement  that  Junia  (feminine)  is  correct  has  resulted  in  feminism 
claiming  support  here  for  egalitarian  spiritual  rule  in  local  church  life.  However, 
¢pÒstoloj, apostolos is often used in a more general sense of “a sent person” (II 
Cor.  8:23;  Phil.  2:25  re  Epaphroditus;  I  Thess.  2:6  re  Paul,  Silvanus,  Timothy), 
rather than the distinctive office of Acts 1:21-26. Thus Andronicus and Junia were 
“outstanding/splendid” ™p…sthmoj, episte ¯mos,  amongst  the  apostles,  that  is  those 
such  as  Phoebe,  Prisca  and  Aquila,  who  were  highly  esteemed  gospel  emissaries, 
missionaries  (from  the  Latin  missio,  I  send).  But  further,  their  kinship  with  Paul 
included  being  “fellow  prisoners,”  sunaicm£lwtoj,  sunaichmalo¯tos,  in  the  past 
for the cause of Christ, as were Aristarchus, Col. 4:10, and Epaphras, Philem. 23. 
Herodion was probably a freedman formerly employed within the household and 
lineage of King Herod.
 
d.  Fellow workman, sunergÒj, sunergos, Urbanus, v. 9a. 
 
Being  “our  fellow  worker”  rather  than  “my  fellow  workers”  as  were  Prisca  and 
Aquila,  v.  3,  may  indicate  a  lack  of  personal  acquaintance.  However  a  notable 
reputation has been conveyed through correspondence. 
 
e.  Approved, dÒkimon, dokimon, Apelles, v. 10a. 
 
While the use of “approved/tested in Christ” in 14:18 suggests general acceptance, 
yet  approval  through  persecution  cannot  be  discounted,  as  the  experience  of 
Prisca and Aquila indicates, v. 4, cf. James 1:12. 
 
f.  Those of [the households of] Aristobulus and Narcissus, vs. 10b, 11b. 
 
The idiomatic expression here is an encompassing description of those who have 
worked  for  the  household  of  Aristobulus,  a  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great.  So 
Narcissus is probably a famous person who has employed a number of Christians, 
perhaps as Lightfoot suggests, a certain renowned wealthy freedman.
13
 
 
g.  Choice, ™klektÒj, eklektos, Rufus and his mother, v. 13. 
 
This  distinguished,  exceptional  saint,  is  traditionally  identified  as  that  son  of  he 
who  was,  “pressed  into  service  [as]  a  passer-by  coming  from  the  country,  Simon 
of  Cyrene  (the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus),  to  bear  His  [Christ’s]  cross” 
(Mark 15:21).
14
 This association could be supported by Paul’s respectful comment 
that  Rufus’  mother  is  also  his  own,  perhaps  due  to  an  earlier  relationship  in 
Jerusalem. 
 
 
 
 
                                              
13
  Lightfoot, Philippians, p. 175. 
14
  Cautious support here comes from Cranfield, Godet, Lightfoot, Moo, Morris. 
FAREWELL GREETINGS IN THE GOSPEL 
 
405
h.  Miscellaneous, vs. 14-15. 
 
While  “the  church  that  is  in  their  house  [of  Prisca  and  Aquila],”  v.  5a,  was 
probably the main assembly point for the Christians in Rome, yet there may have 
been sub-fellowships within large households, as mentioned in vs. 10-11. 
 
(1)  The  house  fellowship  of  Asyncritus,  Phlegon,  Hermes,  Patrobas,  Hermas, 
and other brethren, v. 14. 
 
(2)  The house fellowship of Philologus, Julia, Nereus and sister, Olympas, and 
other brethren, v. 15. 
 
3.  To the fellowship in general, v. 16. 
 
“Greet one another with a holy kiss,” fil»mati ¡g…w (cf. I Cor. 16:20; II Cor. 13:12; I 
Thess. 5:26, “a kiss of love,” I Pet. 5:14; ). Equivalent to a hug, a warm handshake, the 
holy  kiss  was  a  customary  form  of  greeting  (Luke  7:45;  15:20;  22:47-48),  usually  on 
the  cheek.
15
  Moo  adds  that,  “many  commentators  think  that  Paul  may  here  be 
envisaging  a  worship  gathering  in  which  his  letter  is  being  read  aloud  and  which  is 
concluded with such a kiss.”
16
 The modern debasing of the social kiss certainly justifies 
a  more  appropriate  form  of  a  physical  greeting.  John  Bunyan  was  aware  of  this 
problem  when  in  Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners  he  comments:  “[S]ome 
[good  men]  indeed  have  urged  the  holy  kiss;  but  then  I  have  asked  why  they  made 
baulks [distinctions by omitting], why they did salute the most handsome, and let the 
ill-favored  go;  thus,  how  laudable  soever  such  things  have  been  in  the  eyes  of  others, 
they have been unseemly in my sight.”
17
 
“All the churches of Christ greet you.” While Paul ministered in various regions, yet he 
maintained  constant  communication  with  the  major  Gentile  fellowships  including 
Antioch,  as  well  as  with  the  Jewish  mother  church  at  Jerusalem.  The 
“emissaries/apostles” of vs. 1-2, 3-4, 7 would update the Apostle, convey greetings to 
him,  and  thus  enable  him  to  channel  greetings  to  the  saints  at  Rome.  Thus  as  Paul 
writes  in  Corinth  he  has  associates  with  him  from  a  variety  of  church  locations  (Acts 
20:1-4). Hence this inclusive greeting provides the saints at Rome with a sense of unity 
with the larger body of Christ. 
 
 
C.  THE WARNINGS TO THE SAINTS, VS. 17-20. 
 
In the midst of greetings from Paul, vs. 1-16, and his associates, vs. 21-23, there is injected a 
vigorous,  brief  warning,  vs.  17-20,  that  might  seem  unexpected.  Perhaps  at  this  point  the 
Apostle takes the reed pen from Tertius, v. 22, to add a signature paragraph that concludes 
with  v.  20.  However,  while  circumstances  in  the  more  troubled  region  of  Corinth  might 
prompt  this  jealous,  affectionate  concern,  there  are  other  instances  of  similar  concluding 
epistolary  admonition  (I  Cor.  16:13-14,  22;  Colo.  4:17;  I  Tim.  6:20-21;  II  Tim.  4:14-18;  I 
                                              
15
  Joseph Shulam, A Commentary on the Jewish Roots of Romans, p. 518. 
16
  Moo, Romans, p. 926. 
17
  John Bunyan, The Works of John Bunyan, I, § 315, p. 46. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
406
John 5:21). Further, Morris suggests that, “Romans is a long letter and it must have taken 
quite  a  while  to  compose  it.  It  is  possible  that  news  was  brought  to  Paul  just  before  he 
finished  it  that  made  him  think  a  warning  was  in  order.”
18
  The  preventative  rather  than 
curative  emphasis  here  is  probably  indicated  by  the  commendation  of  v.  19.  As  a  parent 
often  farewells  a  departing  child  with  a  string  of  practical  maxims,  so  Paul,  as  a  spiritual 
parent (Phil. 2:19-22; I Thess. 1:7, 11), offers similar spiritual counsel.  
 
1.  Be alert for contentious teachers, vs. 17-18. 
 
Identification  of  the  offending  schismatics  may  include  two  categories.  There  are  the 
carnal  libertarian  antinomians  of  6:1-23,  those  claiming  a  licentious  freedom  in  the 
light of the sovereignty and freeness of grace, though more likely Paul has in mind the 
weak  in faith  who hold  on  to  the  crutch  of  the  law,  including  dietary regulations and 
appointed days, 14:1-15:5. In the later case, an intolerant Judaizing spirit that ignores 
the overriding injunction of 13:8-10; 14:10-13, 17-20; 15:2 presents a situation that is 
ripe for the eruption of partisan conflict. The crux of the peril here lies in the subtlety 
of these agitators emerging within the fellowship of the saints at Rome. 
 
a.  They oppose apostolic doctrine, v. 17. 
 
The preceding recommendation of the “holy kiss” may have suggested to Paul the 
deceitful treachery that such an outward greeting may conceal in local church life, 
as  was  illustrated  by  Judas  (Prov.  27:6;  Matt.  26:49;  Luke  22:47-48).  Therefore 
alertness is called for by all the saints, not just the Elders. “So I exhort/urge you, 
brethren, to watch out for those causing divisions [carnal dissentions, Gal. 5:20] 
and stumbling blocks that conflict with the teaching/-doctrine which you learned, 
and  turn  away  [™kkl…nw,  ekklino¯]  from  them.”  Could  it  be  that  in  this  instance 
the lack of specificity concerning the heresies in mind is intentional since the fruit 
of  disruptiveness  is  what  is  to  be  identified.  In  other  words  some  people  will 
reveal  their  spiritual  fraudulence  by  leaving  behind  fractured  relationships 
wherever  they  go,  while  true  doctrine  will  tend  to  unify  according  to  13:8-10; 
14:1720; 15:2. However it is to be noticed that a body of apostolic doctrine has 
already been established in Rome which is recognized as a standard against which 
all  such  novel  teaching  is  to  be  measured;  it  is  “that  form  of  teaching  to  which 
you were committed,” 6:17, or “the word of the faith which we are preaching,” 
10:8; cf. Jude 3. 
 
b.  They deceive with smooth doctrine, v. 18. 
 
The  beguiling,  seductive  character  of  a  Pliable,  a  Mr.  Worldly-Wiseman,  a 
Talkative,  or  a  Demas,
19
  is  now  described.  “For  such  men  are  not  serving  our 
Lord  Christ  but  their  own  belly/appetite  [koil…a,  koilia,  Phil.  3:18-19],  and 
through  smooth  and  flattering  conversation  they  deceive  the  hearts  of  the 
unwary/naïve/unsuspecting [saints].” Consider Paul’s three pilgrims here. 
 
                                              
18
  Morris, Romans, p. 538. 
19
  All  four  of  these  famous  characters  in  The  Pilgrim’s  Progress,  although  counterfeit  pilgrims,  were  able  to 
deceive, for a time, such authentic pilgrims as Christian, Faithful, and Hopeful.  
FAREWELL GREETINGS IN THE GOSPEL 
 
407
(1)  Mr.  Smooth-man,  crhstolog…a,  chre ¯stologia,  that  is  “plausibility,”  or 
“persuasiveness.”  David  describes  how,  “his  speech  was  smoother  than 
butter,  but  his  heart  was  war;  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet  they  were 
drawn swords” Ps. 55:21). Bunyan designates him as a citizen of the town of 
Fair-speech  that  was  inhabited  by  a  whole  coterie  of  sophisticated  rogues. 
His belly craved for the entertainment of brilliant and suave discourse. 
 
(2)  Mr.  Flatterer,  eÙlog…a,  eulogia,  that  is  “sycophant,”  or  “sweet  talker,” 
whose  words  are,  at  a  surface  level,  appealing  and  pleasantly  manipulative. 
According to Peter such false prophets exploit with “false/fabricated words,” 
plasto‹j  lÒgoij,  plastois  logois  (II  Pet.  2:3)  that  lack  concrete,  objective 
truth.  His  belly  sought  self-advancement  through  the  feel-good,  ego-
boosting, back-scratching stimulation of others. 
 
(3)  Mr.  Innocent,  ¥kakoj,  akakos,  that  is  “not  bad,”  or  “guileless,”  being 
somewhat gullible and not acquainted with all of the machinations of human 
depravity.  Consequently  he  is  hoodwinked  by  the  false  charm  of  a  Mr. 
Smooth-man  and  Mr.  Flatterer.  While  his  belly  was  under  the  control  of  a 
redeemed  soul,  yet  he  lacked  doctrinal  instruction  and  testing  concerning 
sin’s exceeding sinfulness and the wiles of the devil. 
 
2.  Be good before the God of peace and grace, vs. 19-20. 
 
Paul’s  sense  of  pastoral  balance  is  indicated  by  the  following  encouragements  that 
follow  sober  warnings.  Whereas  v.  17  negatively  enjoins  the  Roman  saints  to  “turn 
away” from factious influences, here they are positively entreated, “to be wise in what 
is good,” v. 19.  
 
a.  Let an obedient reputation encourage you, v. 19a. 
 
“For  [the  renown  of]  your  obedience  has  reached  to  all  [the  whole  world,  1:8, 
Asia  Minor?  the  Roman  Empire?].”  Perhaps  the  magisterial  character  of  this 
epistle is reflective of the admiration that Paul has for the relative maturity of this 
church,  especially  since  he  has  not  needed  to  deal  with  the  variety  of  problems, 
related to immaturity, that are manifest in Galatia, Corinth, or Colosse. Thus he 
is,  “convinced  of  better  things  concerning  you,  and  things  that  accompany 
salvation”  (Heb.  6:9).  The  “obedience”  here  is  probably  commitment  to  the 
gospel,  1:5;  16:26,  which  was  the  very  reason  that  Paul  writes  to  expound  in 
greater  depth  upon  that  same  sacred  message,  1:15.  For  the  Apostle,  gospel 
faithfulness is of paramount importance. 
 
b.  Let innocence in evil identify you, v. 19b. 
 
“Therefore  I  rejoice  in  you  and  desire  that  you  be  wise  in  what  is  good,  and 
innocent/unpolluted  in  what  is  bad.”  In  other  words,  love  “does  not  rejoice  in 
unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth” (I Cor. 13:6). The child of God will 
major on right teaching, not heresy; he will concentrate upon the moral excellency 
of God that is incumbent upon him rather than the wiles of the devil and infinite 
variations  on  the  theme  of  sin.  Thus,  “be  shrewd  as  serpents  and  innocent  as 
doves”  (Matt.  10:16),  or,  “do  not  be  children  in  your  thinking;  yet  in  evil  be 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
408
infants, but in your thinking be mature” (I Cor. 14:20). This attitude is to sharply 
contrast  with  the  experts  in  subtle  sinning  described  in  v.  18  (Jer.  4:22).  As 
Charles Kingsley wrote: “Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever.” 
 
c.  Let the God of peace defend you, v. 20a. 
 
“The God of peace [15:33] will crush Satan [the Adversary] under your feet with 
speed  [in  a  short  while?,  ™n  t£cei,  en  tachei].”  The  God  of  Israel  who  imparts 
peace  is  distinguished here  (Is.  26:3;  32:15-18;  66:12),  yet  the  means  to  this  end 
involves  the  conquest  of  Satan.  Probably  allusion  is  made  here  to  the 
protevangelium of Genesis 3:15, where, “He [the seed of the woman] shall bruise 
you [the serpent] on the head, and you [the serpent] shall bruise him [the seed of 
the woman] on the heel.” However we here see the wounded “heel” vindicated; in 
Genesis the heel is bruised by the serpent, whereas in Romans God causes the feet 
of  Christians,  being  related  to  the  seed  of  the  woman,  to  victoriously  crush 
serpentine  Satan.  Further,  the  direct  address  to  the  church  at  Rome,  as  if  the 
saints there would immediately understand the idiomatic use of “Satan,” suggests 
a more immediate rather than a future eschatological prospect.
20
 Could it be that, 
in Christian conversation, the Roman Empire was “the evil empire” of that day, 
which, as is well known, in the course of history would soon yield to Christianity 
by the time of the reign of Constantine? 
 
d.  Let the grace of the Lord Jesus be with you, v. 20b. 
 
With some degree of variation, this is Paul’s usual form of concluding benediction 
that focuses on “grace” which is sourced in “Christ” (I Cor. 16:23; II Cor. 13:14; 
Gal.  6:18;  Eph.  6:24;  Phil.  4:23;  I  Thess.  5:28;  II  Thess.  3:18;  II  Tim.  4:22; 
Philem,  25).  In  the  remaining  epistles,  “grace”  only  is  mentioned  (Col.  4:18;  I 
Tim.  6:21;  Tit.  3:15).  This  custom  is  paralleled  by  Paul’s  invariable  opening 
benediction, as here in 1:7 and all of his thirteen epistles, in which “grace” that is 
sourced in “Christ” is always commended. However, a curious feature here is the 
fact that the “Father” is always included in the opening benedictions and yet only 
once  mentioned  in  the  closing  benedictions  (II  Cor.  13:14).  Why  is  this  so? 
Perhaps  Paul  the  Hebrew  felt  it  necessary  to  make  such  a  reference  at  the 
commencement  of  every  one  of  his  epistles  so  that  agreement  with  Jewish 
monotheism  might  be  evident.  Further,  even  today  at  the  commencement  of 
Christian  prayer,  the  Father  is  first  addressed;  then  in  conclusion  the  mediatoral 
name of Jesus is invoked. Overall, this relentless and primary emphasis on “grace” 
in  all  of  Paul’s  opening  and  closing  benedictions  provides  strong  justification  for 
identifying him as “the Apostle of grace.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
20
  Calvin, Haldane, Morris see more immediate, historic fulfillment, while Cranfield understands eschatological 
consummation. 
FAREWELL GREETINGS IN THE GOSPEL 
 
409
D.  THE GREETINGS FROM THE SAINTS, VS. 21-24. 
 
 Here is a dynamic portrait of Paul’s ministry in Corinth seen through the lens of his spiritual 
entourage. There are eight associates who appear to be known by the saints at Rome. The 
collective  interest  here  expressed  indicates  an  interdependency  amongst  first  century  local 
churches that does not preclude independency. 
 
1.  The fellow worker, Timothy, v. 21a. 
 
“TimÒqeoj, Timotheos,” heads the list here being Paul’s closest pastoral associate who 
is  similarly  mentioned,  though  at  the  commencement,  of  II  Corinthians,  I  and  II 
Thessalonians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon.  His  unmatched  loyalty  was 
probably  the  cause  of  such  recognition  (Phil.  2:19-22;  II  Tim.  3:10-11).  In  I 
Corinthians  16:10  he  is  described  as  “doing  the  Lord’s  work,  as  I  also  am.”  In  I 
Timothy 1:2 the address is to “my true child in the faith,” while in II Timothy 1:2 it is 
to  “my  beloved  son.”  This  father/son  relationship  probably  commenced  when  they 
initially  became  acquainted  during  Paul’s  first  missionary  journey  while  passing 
through Lystra and preaching the gospel (Acts 14:6-7). In again visiting Lystra during 
his  second  missionary  journey,  Paul  appears  to  become  reacquainted  with  Timothy, 
now  a  “disciple,”  and  his  Jewish  mother  Eunice,  now  a  “believer.”  Thus  Timothy  is 
recruited  by  the  Apostle  and  then  circumcised  to  facilitate  witnessing  to  Jews  (Acts 
16:1-3). During Paul’s third missionary journey, he moves from his influential ministry 
at Ephesus to residence in the house of Gaius at Corinth for three months (Act 20:2-3), 
where  Romans  is  composed.  Thus  Timothy  may  have  been  an  editorial  contributor.  
Probably  separated  from  Paul  when  the  Apostle  was  sent  to  Rome  on  trial,  he  later 
settled in Ephesus and also experienced imprisonment himself (Heb. 13:23). Timothy’s 
esteem  is  indicated  with  great  pathos  when  Paul,  in  probably  writing  a  short  while 
before his martyrdom in Rome, concludes: “Make every effort to come soon; . . . When 
you come bring the cloak which I left in Troas with Carpus, and the books, especially 
the  parchments.  .  .  .  Make  every  effort  to  come  before  winter.  .  .  .  The  Lord  be  with 
your spirit. Grace be with you” (II Tim. 9, 13, 21-22). 
 
2.  The three kinsmen, Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, v. 21b 
 
“LoÚkioj,  Loukios,”  or  Lucius,  could  be  “Lucius  of  Cyrene,”  a  prophet  or  teacher 
from  Syrian  Antioch  (Acts  13:1).  It  is  likely  that  “'I£swn,  Iaso¯n,”  or  Jason,  bravely 
provided  hospitality  for  Paul  in  hostile  Thessalonica  (Acts  17:5-9).  “Sws…patroj,  So¯
sipatros,” or Sosipater, is possibly “Sopater of Berea, the son of Pyrrhus” (Acts 20:4) 
who, with six other disciples, leaves Greece and joins Paul at Troas. All are described 
as “my kinsmen/relatives/fellow nationals [suggen»j, sungene ¯s],” hence Jews. 
 
3.  The secretary, Tertius, v. 22. 
 
“Tšrtiuj,  Tertius,”  was  a  scribe  or  amanuensis,  “Ð  gr£yaj,  ho  graspas,”  who  wrote 
according to Paul’s dictation. “I Tertius greet you, the one having written the epistle in 
the  Lord,”  is  emphatic  and  may  well  reflect  a  sense  of  devout  commitment  in 
transcribing  such  a  significant  composition,  although  “greet  you  in  the  Lord”  is 
possible. In either case we have the signature of a faithful Christian worker. 
 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS 
 
410
4.  The host, Gaius, v. 23a. 
 
“G£oj, Gaios,” a common (perhaps first personal) name, probably refers to the Gaius 
of I Corinthians 1:14 who Paul baptized. In providing hospitality for the Apostle and 
his  party,  as  well  as  the  church,  he  was  likely  a  man  of  meansFor  this  reason  he  is 
thought  to  be  the  same  as  Titius  Justus  (perhaps  a  family  name)  who  also 
accommodated  Paul  in  Corinth  (Acts  18:7).  Could  he  also  have  come  from  Ephesus 
(Acts 19:29)?
 
5.  The city treasurer, Erastus, v. 23b. 
 
”Erastoj,”  or  Erastos,  was  the  “the  treasurer/manager  [o„konÒmoj  oikonomos]  of  the 
city,” no small position in such a cosmopolitan place as Corinth.
21
 Perhaps, subsequent 
to  his  conversion,  he  became  an  emissary  for  Paul  (Acts  19:21-22;  II  Tim.  4:20). 
Haldane  comments  that:  “The  notice  of  the  office  of  Erastus,  although  in  itself  may 
appear trifling, is in reality of great importance. It shows us that Christians may hold 
offices  even  under  heathen  governments,  and  that  to  serve  Christ  we  are  not  to  be 
abstracted from worldly business.”
22
  
 
6.  The brother, Quartus, v. 23c. 
 
“KoÚartoj,  Quartos,”  is  “the  [Christian?]  brother,”  and  last  mentioned  in  terms  of 
relative significance.  
 
7.  The Apostle, Paul, v. 24. 
 
Certainly  this  is  similar  to  most  Pauline  benedictions  (cf.  I  Cor.  16:23;  II  Cor.  13:14; 
Gal. 6:18; Eph. 6:24; Phil. 4:23; I Thess. 5:28; II Thess. 3:18; II Tim. 4:22; Philem. 25), 
though exactly identical to none. The repetition after v. 20 is unusual. Being excluded 
from the oldest manuscripts, nearly all scholars have declared it to be a later addition.
23
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
21
  Some archaeological evidence may further identify this civic official, Morris, Romans, p. 544n. 
22
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 655. 
23
  Bruce, Cranfield, Lenski, Moo, Morris, Robertson. Contra are Haldane, Meyer, Murray, Zahn. 
CHAPTER XVI 
 
ROMANS 16:25-27 - FAREWELL DOXOLOGY IN 
THE GOSPEL 
 
 
HIS is one of Paul’s great doxologies (cf. 11:33-36; I Tim. 1:17; 6:15-16), and perhaps it was 
written by his own hand following the closing greeting of secretary Tertius, v. 22. Nowhere 
else  does  the  Apostle  give  such  an  effusive  and  specific  declaration  concerning  the  glory  that  is 
due to God on account of the manifold wonders of the gospel. Surely this is fitting with regard to 
the most profound and panoramic representation of the gospel in all of the Bible. Indeed it would 
seem that here is a brief collage of the major gospel elements that have been communicated. The 
singular desire that solicits a chorus of agreement from his addressees is found in v. 27, namely, 
“[According  to  Paul’s  fervent  longing]  let  the  glory  be  attributed  to  God.”  Everything  else 
modifies  this  priority,  though  the  two  principle  reasons  are  His  ability  to  save  and  His 
incomparable wisdom. 
 
 
A.  TO GOD BE THE GLORY WHO IS ABLE TO SAVE, V. 25-26. 
 
Concerning the basic doctrinal elements of these verses, perhaps the order we might accept 
here as normative, would be: 1. The prophets write Scripture. 2. Consequently the gospel is 
proclaimed.  3.  The  mystery,  formerly  silent,  is  revealed.  4.  This  proclamation  is  now 
universal. 5. The desired response is the obedience of faith. 6. The result of authentic faith is 
ongoing  establishment  through  the  gospel.  However,  since  Paul  is  addressing  believers, 
according  to  1:11  and  so  here,  he  commences  with  point  6  which  is  his  immediate  goal, 
namely the strengthening of the saints leading to stability through their better apprehension 
of the gospel. 
 
1.  His gospel aims at the strengthening of believers, v. 25a. 
 
The  accomplishment  of  salvation  is  according  to  God  “who  is  able/sovereignly 
qualified” and yet uses means including the gospel of Jesus Christ, preaching, Scripture, 
the  prophets.  However,  for  the  Christian,  these  means  are  intended  to  result  in  his 
“establishment”  or  firm  footing  in  the  faith.  As  in  every  other  usage  by  Paul  of 
sthr…zw, ste ¯rizo¯, (1:11; I Thess. 3:3, 13; II Thess. 2:17; 3:3), so here the meaning is that 
of  strengthening  the  church  as  a  whole  and  the  Christian  in  particular,  making  him 
steadfast  through  gospel  sanctification.
1
  This  represents  the  fundamental  and 
encompassing purpose of Romans (1:15). But the obvious implication here is that God 
will  certainly  accomplish  this  purpose  of  edification  and  completion,  with  all  of  its 
complexity, and for this reason He is to be glorified. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
1
  Notice  how  Luke  uses  the  strengthened  form,  ™pisthr…zw,  episte¯ rizo¯ ,  to  describe  Paul’s  nurture  of  churches 
previously planted in Asia Minor (Acts 14:22:15:41). 
T 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  412
2.  His gospel is the preaching of Christ, v. 25b. 
 
According to Paul, at the root of the Christian being established is “my gospel and the 
preaching of Jesus Christ.” He delights to write of “my gospel” (2:16; II Tim. 2:8), not 
because  of  any  sense  of  exclusive  ownership,  or  difference  with  regard  to  say  James, 
Peter,  and  John  (Gal.  2:9;  cf.  I  Cor.  15:11).  However  Paul’s  gospel  does  have  an 
element  of  distinctiveness  in  that  it  is  one  of  direct  revelation  from  Christ  (Gal.  1:11-
12) that included an authoritative charge for delivery to the Gentiles (Acts 9:15). Thus 
he is a herald bearing “the proclamation,” or tÕ k»rugma, to ke¯rugma, the jewel of the 
gospel  (II  Cor.  4:7)  as  a  message  to  be  delivered  as  received  and  commissioned  (Gal. 
2:7;  Eph.  3:6-7;  I  Tim.  1:11;  II  Tim.  1:10-11).  Hence,  that  God  should  effectively 
accomplish  His  saving  purposes  through  this  human  agency,  even  the  “foremost  of 
sinners” (I Tim. 1:15), is further cause for Him to be glorified. 
 
3.  His gospel is a mystery revelation, v. 25c. 
 
Certainly the gospel proclamation focuses on the person and work of Jesus Christ, 
yet there is a facet of this revelation that is a present wonderment. It is the aspect of 
“mystery,” must»rion muste¯rion, that newly revealed truth previously hidden from 
view,  “kept  secret  [silent,  sig£w,  sigao¯ ]  for  long  ages  past,”  which  is  the 
incorporation of the Gentiles, or “nations,” (v. 26b, cf. Eph. 3:6) into the promised 
blessing  of  Abraham  (Gen.  12:1-3).  Such  a  truth  was  very  much  at  the  heart  of 
Paul’s  distinctive  ministry,  even  as  he  has  repeatedly  emphasized  (1:5,  13;  3:29; 
9:23-24, 30; 11:11-32; 15:8-19, 27; 16:3-4). So this weaving together of the saving 
destiny  of  Jew  and  Gentile,  neither  being  totally  or  utterly  forsaken,  is  to  Paul  an 
astonishment  here  worthy  of  declaring  God’s  glory,  even  as  he  declares  his  same 
intent for the same reason in 11:33-36. 
 
4.  His gospel is inscripturated, v. 26a. 
 
“But  now,”  a  dormant  truth  has  erupted,  has  become  “manifest,”  the  aorist  of 
fanerÒw,  phaneroo¯ ,  indicating  an  historic  intervention  (Gal.  4:4).  To  be  sure  “the 
Scriptures  of  the  prophets”  have  always  contained  the  truth  of  the  gospel  and 
particularly  with  regard  to  the  Gentiles,  1:1-2;  3:21,  as  Paul  has  amply 
demonstrated,  15:8-19.  Even  so,  only  at  the  coming  of  Christ  has  the  relative 
silence  been  broken;  a  distinctive  and  universal  aspect  has  burst  forth.  Haldane 
adds: “The Jews were prone to consider the blessings of the Messiah as confined to 
themselves;  but  they  had  no  warrant,  or  even  plausible  pretext,  for  this  error  in 
their  own  Scriptures.”
2
  Even  so  this  timing  is  according  to  “the  [authoritative] 
commandment  of  the  eternal  God.”  The  neglect  of  the  Jews  cannot  thwart  God’s 
design to save the Gentiles, and this also is a great stimulant to the glorification of 
God. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
2
  Robert Haldane, Commentary on Romans, p. 659. 
FAREWELL DOXOLOGY IN THE GOSPEL  413
5.  His gospel solicits the obedience of faith, v. 26b. 
 
The  thrust  here  does  not  merely  describe  a  possibility,  but  a  God  ordained  certainty. 
Thus Paul assures us that his authorized gospel proclamation will be both fruitful and 
ecumenical.  The  “obedience  of  faith,”  which  phrase  is  identically  used  in  1:5, 
represents the apostolic conviction of an authentic harvest that will be identified by its 
“readiness to yield to the demands of faith.” As Moo points out, this understanding of 
faith  that  is  qualified  by  the  thought  of  obedience,  is  elsewhere  described  in  Romans, 
1:8 and 16:9; 10:16a and 10:16b; 11:23 and 11:30-31.
3
 Such initial faith results in the 
life of faith. History has not failed to reflect the Apostle’s expectation at this point, that 
is with regard to the expansion of the gospel in the Gentile world. This effectual global 
outreach that is productive of authentic faith is certainly cause for God to be glorified. 
 
6.  His gospel is universal, v. 26c. 
 
In Ephesians 3:4-11 we have the definitive explanation concerning the revelation of the 
“mystery,” “which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men, as it 
has  now  been  revealed  to  His  holy  apostles  and  prophets  in  the  Spirit;  to  be  specific, 
that the Gentiles are fellow heirs and fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers 
of  the  promise  in  Christ  Jesus  through  the  gospel,  of  which  I  [Paul]  was  made  a 
minister.”  So  here,  this  same  “mystery  .  .  .  has  been  made  known  to  all  the  nations 
[Gentiles].” Again, this is God’s “establishment,” v. 25a, which conveys the great vista 
of  His  saving  intent  that  is  far  beyond  the  anticipation  of  man;  and  therefore  this  is 
something to be acknowledged as sublimely glorious.   
 
 
B.  TO GOD BE THE GLORY WHO ALONE IS WISE THROUGH THE GOSPEL, V. 27. 
 
Surely we have a recollection here of the thought of 11:33-36: “Oh, the depth of the riches 
both  of  the  wisdom  [sof…a,  sophia]  and  knowledge  of  God.  .  .  .  To  Him  be  the  glory 
forever.  Amen,”  especially  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  both  doxologies  are  concerned  with 
the relationship between Jew and Gentile in the purposes of God.  
 
1.  Glorify Him as uniquely wise. 
 
In the midst of a world of gods, there is only one God who is wise in His saving ways 
with  mankind,  in  the  same  manner  that  God  is  the  sole  and  only  God  (I  Tim.  1:17; 
Jude  25).  Stephen  Charnock  adds:  “As  Christ  saith,  ‘None  is  good  but  God’  (Matt. 
19:17), so the apostle saith, none wise but God. As all creatures are unclean in regard 
of  his  purity,  so  they  are  all  fools  in  regard  of  his  wisdom,  yea,  the  glorious  angels 
themselves (Job 4:18). Wisdom is the royalty of God; the proper dialect of all his ways 
and works. No creature can lay claim to it; he is so wise, that he is wisdom itself.”
4
 As 
Haldane comments: “The gods of the heathen are not wise. The god of the Deist is not 
                                            
3
  Douglas Moo, The Epistle to the Romans, p. 52n. 
4
  Stephen  Charnock,  The  Works  of  Stephen  Charnock,  II,  p.  10.  This  verse  is  the  basis  of  Charnock’s 
comprehensive study here of the wisdom of God, pp. 3-98. 
AN OUTLINED COMMENTARY ON ROMANS  414
wise.  The  god  of  the  Arian  is  not  wise.  No  view  ever  given  of  the  Divine  character 
exhibits the infinite wisdom of God in redemption, but what is found in the Gospel.”
5
  
 
2.  Glorify Him as uniquely wise through Jesus Christ. 
 
Jesus  Christ  was  wisdom  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  in  eternity  past  (Prov.  8:12-31; 
John 1:1, 18); he has become wisdom incarnate, even from his youth (Luke 2:40), that 
is  “the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  .  .  .  who  became  to  us  wisdom  from 
God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption” (I Cor. 1:24, 30). As Isaac 
Watts has penned: 
        The Lord, descending from above, 
           Invites his children near, 
        While power, and truth, and boundless love 
           Display there glories here. 
        Here, in thy gospel’s wondrous frame, 
           Fresh wisdom we pursue; 
        A thousand angels learn thy name, 
           Beyond whate’er they knew. 
        Thy name is writ in fairest lines; 
           Thy wonders here we trace; 
        Wisdom through all the mystery shines, 
           And shines in Jesus’ face. 
 
3.  Glorify Him as uniquely wise forever. 
 
Unlike the temporal character of the Law, that “was added . . . until the seed [Christ] 
would  come”  (Gal.  3:19),  that  was  appointed  “until  the  date  set  by  the  father”  (Gal. 
4:2),  that “came  in  so that  the  transgression would  increase”  (Rom.  5:20),  the gospel 
was ordained as an “eternal gospel” (Rev. 14:6; cf. Heb. 13:20) so that “grace would 
reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord” (Rom. 5:21; 
cf.  6:22).  Here  is  cause  for  God  to  be  glorified  forever.  Here  the  saints  at  Rome  are 
encouraged to offer their “amen” of heartfelt agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
5
  Haldane, Romans, p. 660. 