      WORD
     BIBLICAL
   COMMENTARY
                             VOLUME 44

         COLOSSIANS,
          PHILEMON
       PETER T. O’BRIEN

                    ——————General Editors——————
                           David A. Hubbard
                           Glenn W. Barker*
                  ——————Old Testament Editor——————
                            John D. W. Watts
                  ——————New Testament Editor——————
                             Ralph P. Martin


  WORD BOOKS, PUBLISHER • DALLAS, TEXAS

WORD BIBLICAL COMMENTARY:
COLOSSIANS AND PHILEMON
Copyright © 1982 by Word, Incorporated
   All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced in any form without the
   written permission of the publishers.
   Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
   Main entry under title:
   Word biblical commentary.
      Includes bibliographies.
      1. Bible—Commentaries—Collected works.
   BS491.2.W67 220.7‘7 81-71768
   ISBN 0-8499-0243-6 (v. 44) AACR2
   Printed in the United States of America
   Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations in the body of the commentary are
   from the Revised Standard Version of the Bible, copyright 1946 (renewed 1973), 1956,
   and © 1971 by the Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the
   Churches of Christ in the USA, and are used by permission. Those marked NIV are from
   the New International Version of the Bible, copyright © 1973 by New York Bible
   Society International. The author‘s own translation of the text appears in italic type
   under the heading ―Translation.‖



To
my wife, Mary
and our children
David, Stephen,
Libby and




Table of Contents
Editorial Preface
Author‘s Preface
INTRODUCTION TO COLOSSIANS
INTRODUCTORY GREETING (1:1, 2)
THANKSGIVING: FAITH-LOVE-HOPE AND THE GOSPEL (1:3–8)
AN INTERCESSION FOR KNOWLEDGE AND GODLY CONDUCT (1:9–14)
CHRIST THE LORD IN CREATION AND REDEMPTION (1:15–20)
RECONCILIATION ACCOMPLISHED AND APPLIED (1:21–23)
PAUL‘S MISSION AND PASTORAL CONCERN (1:24–2:5)
THE ANTIDOTE TO ERROR: CHRIST IN ALL HIS FULLNESS (2:6–15)
FREEDOM FROM LEGALISM (2:16–23)
SEEK THE THINGS ABOVE (3:1–4)
PUT AWAY THE SINS OF THE PAST (3:5–11)
PUT ON THE GRACES OF CHRIST (3:12–17)
BEHAVIOR IN THE CHRISTIAN HOUSEHOLD (3:18–4:1)
FINAL ADMONITIONS: PERSISTENCE IN PRAYER AND RIGHT BEHAVIOR
   TOWARD OUTSIDERS (4:2–6)
PERSONAL GREETINGS AND INSTRUCTIONS (4:7–18)
INTRODUCTION TO PHILEMON
INTRODUCTORY GREETING (1–3)
THANKSGIVING AND INTERCESSION FOR PHILEMON (4–7)
PAUL‘S PLEA FOR ONESIMUS (8–20)
FINAL REMARKS AND GREETINGS (21–25)
BIBLIOGRAPHY




Author’s Preface
    It was toward the end of 1977 that I first received an invitation from the Editors of the
Word Biblical Commentary to write a volume on Colossians and Philemon in their newly
projected series and I am grateful to them for taking the risk with one who had not written a
commentary before. Over the last four years I have pondered the issues raised by these two
Pauline letters, and have been amazed how again and again God has spoken through these
parts of his word to contemporary pastoral and theological issues.
    I am especially grateful to Professor Ralph Martin through whom the initial invitation
came to contribute a volume in this series, for his unfailing help and encouragement over
the past four years, and the stimulation I have received from his own writings on these two
NT letters. The climax was a personal visit he made to Moore College in June-August,
1981.
    Anyone who attempts to write a commentary in the area of the Pauline letters quickly
realizes how indebted he is to those who have trodden the path before. Bishop Eduard
Lohse‘s magisterial volume in the Hermeneia series has been constantly at my side while
the many writings of Professor Eduard Schweizer, including his commentary in the EKKNT
series, have been a source of stimulation and help. Even when I have parted company with
these two writers on a particular point of interpretation I have been grateful for the clarity
and freshness with which they have presented the issues. There are many other writers to
whom I am indebted as the reader will quickly discover.
    It would not have been possible to complete this volume within the deadlines set by the
Editors without a period of uninterrupted study and I am thankful to the Moore College
Committee, especially its Chairman, Sir Marcus Loane, Archbishop of Sydney, and Canon
Broughton Knox, Principal of the College, for granting a period of six months‘ study leave
in 1978–79 which I was able to spend in Cambridge, England at Tyndale House. I am
grateful to the staffs of the University of Cambridge and Tyndale Libraries for their
assistance and for the stimulation received from fellow-researchers while working at
Tyndale House.
    Messrs. E. J. Brill of Leiden have kindly permitted me to quote from my volume,
Introductory Thanksgivings in the Letters of Paul, NovTSup 49, published in 1977.
    My thanks are due to Miss Jeanette Logan, Miss Wendy Dahl, Mrs. Jenny Gardner and
Mrs. Joan Skillicorn for their patience in typing and retyping a lengthy manuscript.
    My wife Mary, and our children David, Stephen, Libby and Sarah, to whom this book is
dedicated, must have felt at times that they ate, drank and slept the issues of Colossians and
Philemon. They have helped me in so many ways to a deeper understanding of this part of
God‘s word not least in the household code of Colossians 3.
PETER T. O‘BRIEN
Sydney, Australia
January, 1982




Editorial Preface
    The launching of the Word Biblical Commentary brings to fulfillment an enterprise of
several years‘ planning. The publishers and the members of the editorial board met in 1977
to explore the possibility of a new commentary on the books of the Bible that would
incorporate several distinctive features. Prospective readers of these volumes are entitled to
know what such features were intended to be; whether the aims of the commentary have
been fully achieved time alone will tell.
    First, we have tried to cast a wide net to include as contributors a number of scholars
from around the world who not only share our aims, but are in the main engaged in the
ministry of teaching in university, college, and seminary. They represent a rich diversity of
denominational allegiance. The broad stance of our contributors can rightly he called
evangelical, and this term is to be understood in its positive, historic sense of a commitment
to Scripture as divine revelation, and to the truth and power of the Christian gospel.
    Then, the commentaries in our series are all commissioned and written for the purpose
of inclusion in the Word Biblical Commentary. Unlike several of our distinguished
counterparts in the field of commentary writing, there are no translated works, originally
written in a non-English language. Also, our commentators were asked to prepare their own
rendering of the original biblical text and to use those languages as the basis of their own
comments and exegesis. What may be claimed as distinctive with this series is that it is
based on the biblical languages, yet it seeks to make the technical and scholarly approach to
a theological understanding of Scripture understandable by—and useful to—the fledgling
student, the working minister, and colleagues in the guild of professional scholars and
teachers as well.
    Finally, a word must be said about the format of the series. The layout, in clearly
defined sections, has been consciously devised to assist readers at different levels. Those
wishing to learn about the textual witnesses on which the translation is offered are invited
to consult the section headed Notes. If the readers‘ concern is with the state of modern
scholarship on any given portion of Scripture, they should turn to the sections on
Bibliography and Form/Structure/Setting. For a clear exposition of the passage‘s meaning
and its relevance to the ongoing biblical revelation, the Comment and concluding
Explanation are designed expressly to meet that need. There is therefore something for
everyone who may pick up and use these volumes.
    If these aims come anywhere near realization, the intention of the editors will have been
met, and the labor of our team of contributors rewarded.
General Editors: David A. Hubbard
Glenn W. Barker*
Old Testament: John D. W. Watts
New Testament: Ralph P. Martin




Colossians


Introduction to Colossians
Bibliography
Bandstra, A. J. ―Did the Colossian Errorists Need a Mediator?‖ New Dimensions in New
Testament Study, ed. R. N. Longenecker and M. C. Tenney. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1974,
329–43. Bornkamm, G. ―The Heresy of Colossians.‖ Conflict at Colossae, ed. F. O. Francis and
W. A. Meeks. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1975, 123–45. Originally
published as ―Die Häresie des Kolosserbriefs.‖ TLZ 73 (1948) 11–20. Bruce, F. F. Paul. Apostle of
the Free Spirit. Exeter: Paternoster, 1977, 407–23. American edition, Paul. Apostle of the Heart Set
Free. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977. Bujard, W. Stilanalytische Untersuchungen zum
Kolosserbrief als Beitrag zur Methodik von Sprachvergleichen. SUNT 11. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck
und Ruprecht, 1973. Dibelius, M. ―The Isis Initiation in Apuleius and Related Initiatory Rites.‖
Conflict at Colossae, ed. F. O. Francis and W. A. Meeks. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT:
Scholar‘s Press, 1975, 61–121. Originally published as Die Isisweihe bei Apuleius und verwandte
Initiations-Riten. SHAW 8/4. Heidelberg: Winter, 1917. Duncan, G. S. St. Paul‘s Ephesian
Ministry. A Reconstruction with Special Reference to the Ephesian Origin of the Imprisonment
Epistles. London: Hodder, 1929. Francis, F. O. ―Humility and Angelic Worship in Col 2:18.‖
Conflict at Colossae, ed. F. O. Francis and W. A. Meeks. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT:
Scholar‘s Press, 1975, 163–95. Originally published in ST 16 (1963) 109–34. ——— ―The
Background of EMBATEYEIN (Col 2:18) in Legal Papyri and Oracle Inscriptions.‖ ibid. 197–207.
Guthrie, D. New Testament Introduction. The Pauline Epistles. London: Tyndale, 1961. Hooker,
M. D. ―Were there False Teachers in Colossae?‖ Christ and Spirit in the New Testament. Studies in
honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. B. Lindars and S. S. Smalley. Cambridge: University
Press, 1973, 315–31. Kümmel, W. G. Introduction to the New Testament. Tr H. C. Kee. 2nd ed.
London: SCM, 1975. 17th American edition, Nashville: Abingdon, 1975. Lähnemann, J. Der
Kolosserbrief. Komposition, Situation und Argumentation. SNT 3. Gütersloh: Mohn, 1971.
Lyonnet, S. ―Paul‘s Adversaries in Colossae.‖ Conflict at Colossae, ed. F. O. Francis and W. A.
Meeks. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1975, 147–61. Originally published as
―L‘étude du milieu littéraire et l‘exégèse de Nouveau Testament: 4. Les adversaires de Paul à
Colosses.‖ Bib 37 (1956) 27–38; cf. also his article ―L‘Epître aux Colossiens (Col 2:18) et les
mystères d‘Apollon Clarien.‖ Bib 43 (1962) 417–35. Magie, D. Roman Rule in Asia Minor. 2 vols.
Princeton: University, 1950. Marxsen, W. Introduction to the New Testament. An Approach to its
Problems. Tr G. Buswell. Oxford: Blackwell‘s, 1968, 177–86. American edition, Philadelphia:
Fortress, 1968. Munn, G. L. ―Introduction to Colossians.‖ SWJT 16 (1973) 9–21. Percy, E. Die
Probleme der Kolosser- und Epheserbriefe. SHVL 39. Lund: Gleerup, 1946. Polhill, J. B. ―The
Relationship Between Ephesians and Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 439–50. Ramsay, W. M. The
Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia. Vol. 1. Oxford: University Press, 1895, 208–34. Reicke, B.
―Caesarea, Rome and the Captivity Epistles.‖ Apostolic History and the Gospel. Biblical and
Historical Essays presented to F. F. Bruce on his 60th Birthday, ed. W. W. Gasque and R. P.
Martin. Exeter: Paternoster, 1970, 277–86. American edition, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1970.
———. ―The Historical Setting of Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 429–38. Schweizer, E. ―Zur
neueren Forschung am Kolosserbrief (seit 1970).‖ ThBer 5 (1976) 163–91.



COLOSSAE: THE CITY AND ITS PEOPLE

A. THE CITY

    The ancient city of Colossae (the site of which was discovered in A.D. 1835) was
situated in Phrygia on the southern bank of the river Lycus, a southern tributary of the
Meander, which was famous for its many curves (hence the English word ―meander‖
meaning ―wander,‖ ―wind about‖), and its fertile valley produced large crops of figs and
olives. The site of Colossae is now deserted, but the town of Honaz (formerly a Byzantine
fortress) lies three miles to the southeast.
    Colossae (usually spelled Kolossaiv, though later the spelling Kolassaiv occurs) lay
on the early main road from Ephesus and Sardis to the Euphrates, and so finds mention in
the itineraries of the armies of King Xerxes and Cyrus the Younger which marched along
this road. Herodotus, in the fifth century B.C., speaks of Colossae as ―a great city of
Phrygia‖ (History 7.30.1), while in the following century the chronicler Xenophon
described it as ―a populous city, wealthy and large‖ (Anabasis 1.2.6). Its commercial
significance was due to its wool industry. The wool was gathered from sheep which grazed
on the slopes of the Lycus valley, and dyed a dark red color (Strabo, Geography 12.8.16)
that was generally known as ―Colossian‖ (Latin colossinus: Pliny, History 21.51).
    Later the city declined considerably in importance, so that in Roman times, two
generations before Paul, Strabo speaks of it only as a ―small town‖ (Geography 12.8.13,
povlisma). Colossae had been surpassed by Laodicea, ten miles to the west, and Hierapolis,
twelve miles to the northwest, both in the same Lycus valley. These were mentioned by the
apostle as places where Christians were to be found in close connection with those at
Colossae (Col 2:1; 4:13, 15, 16). According to Strabo, Laodicea had developed into a
flourishing city during the first century B.C. (12.8.16). Founded by Antiochus II (261–246
B.C.) who named it after his wife, Laodice, it had become—under Roman rule—the seat of
a judicial district which was part of the province of Asia (Pliny, History 5.105). Not far
away on the north side of the valley Hierapolis was also important in NT times, particularly
because it was famous for its healing springs (Strabo, Geography 12.8.16).
Parts of the Lycus valley, especially Laodicea, were destroyed by earthquake in A.D. 60–61,
according to Tacitus (Annals 14.27.1). Although Colossae is not mentioned it was probably
damaged on the same occasion (cf. Reicke, RevExp 70 [1973] 430). Strabo expressly called
the whole region a center of repeated earthquakes (Geography 12.8.16), and later Orosius
commented that ―in Asia three cities, Laodicea, Hierapolis and Colossae, have fallen by
earthquakes‖ (Historiae ad paganos 7.7.12. It is not certain, however, whether this report
refers to the same event which Tacitus records; Eusebius, Chronicle 215, dates this
destruction in the ninth or tenth year of Nero).
    Laodicea was soon restored without any outside assistance from Nero or the Romans,
but Colossae never regained its place of prominence. If it was not destroyed in A.D. 60–61
then it may have suffered further seismic damage and was not rebuilt. There is some
inscriptional and numismatic evidence that Colossae continued as a Roman city with its
officials well into the Christian centuries (Inscriptiones ad Res Romanes Pertinentes 4.870;
see Magie, Rule, 127, 986, and note Martin, NCB, 3). The present-day site is uninhabited
and not vet excavated (note S. E. Johnson, ―Unsolved Questions about Early Christianity in
Anatolia.‖ Studies in New Testament and Early Christian Literature. Essays in Honor of
Allen P. Wikgren, ed., D. E. Aune [NovTSup 33; Leiden: Brill, 1972, 181–93] especially
185).
So by the time Paul wrote to the Christians living at Colossae the commercial and social
importance of the town was already on the wane. What effect this might have had on the
townspeople, or the Christians among them, we do not know. Last century Lightfoot (16)
commented: ―Without doubt Colossae was the least important church to which any epistle
of St Paul is addressed‖—and this may well be true.

B. THE PEOPLE OF COLOSSAE

    The three cities of Laodicea, Hierapolis and Colossae belonged to the proconsular
province of Asia. It has been suggested that Colossae‘s population consisted mainly of
indigenous Phrygian and Greek settlers. But in the early part of the second century B.C.,
according to Josephus (Ant 147–53), Antiochus III brought two thousand Jewish families
from Babylon and Mesopotamia and settled them in Lydia and Phrygia (Lightfoot, 19). So
the Colossae of Paul‘s day seems to have been a cosmopolitan city in which differing
cultural and religious elements mingled.
We know that the Jewish influence persisted in the neighborhood of Laodicea after the
immigration of Jews in the second century B.C. Grave inscriptions found at nearby
Hierapolis show that Jews had become part of the Asian culture (Martin, NCB, 3, citing
evidence from Schürer). In 62–61 B.C. the Roman governor, Flaccus, prevented the Jews
from sending to Jerusalem the temple tax which had been collected. He seized as
contraband the sum of twenty pounds weight in gold from the district of Laodicea (and one
hundred pounds of gold from the district of Apamea: Cicero, pro Flacco 28). Calculated at
the rate of a half-shekel for each man (for women, children and slaves were exempted) this
sum represents a Jewish male population of eleven thousand in the district of Laodicea
(Lightfoot, 20; cf. Lohse, 9).



THE CHURCH AT COLOSSAE
    The saints at Colossae, who are addressed as faithful brothers in Christ (1:2), were not
converted through the ministry of Paul himself. This Christian community had come into
existence during a period of vigorous missionary and evangelistic activity associated with
Paul‘s Ephesian ministry (c A.D. 52–55) recorded in Acts 19. But the apostle himself during
his missionary work in Asia Minor had not reached Colossae in the upper valley of the
Lycus (2:1; for a contrary view see Reicke, RevExp 70 [1973] 432, 433). His daily
evangelistic ―dialogs‖ held in the hall of Tyrannus in Ephesus were so effective that Luke
can claim ―all the residents of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks‖
(Acts 19:10). While the work was directed by Paul, he was assisted by several co-workers
and through their ministry in various parts of the province of Asia churches were planted
(for a recent detailed discussion of Paul and his colleagues in his apostolic band see W. H.
Ollrog, Paulus und seine Mitarbeiter. Untersuchungen zu Theorie und Praxis der
paulinischen Mission [WMANT 50; Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener, 1979]). The apostle
was not able to visit all of these personally. Nevertheless they fell within the sphere of his
apostolic ministry to Gentiles and he maintained warm personal contacts with them (cf.
1:24–2:5; Paul‘s ministry includes the Colossians: his sufferings are ―for your sake,‖ 1:24;
his commission was ―to you,‖ 1:25; he is ―for you … and for all who have not seen my
face,‖ 2:1; although absent in body, he is present in spirit, 2:5).
Among these churches planted in the province of Asia were the congregations at Colossae,
Laodicea and Hierapolis. We have no firsthand information about the beginnings of these
Christian communities except what may be derived from the letter to the Colossians itself.
And it is to be inferred from the references to Epaphras in the letter (1:7, 8; 4:12, 13) that
the congregations founded in these three cities were the fruit of his evangelistic endeavor.
He was a native of Colossae (at 4:12 he is described as ―one of you‖) through whom the
Colossians had learned the truth of the gospel (1:7). He was engaged in the same struggle
for the gospel as was Paul (cf. 4:13 with 1:29; 2:1) and this found particular expression in
his urgent and unceasing intercessions for the Christians of the three towns of Colossae,
Laodicea and Hierapolis. High tributes are paid to him by Paul: he is called ―our beloved
fellow-servant‖ and ―a faithful minister of Christ‖ (1:7) who was Paul‘s representative (―on
our behalf,‖ uJpe;r hJmw`n) in Colossae. The readers of this letter may thus be sure that the
―truth‖ had faithfully been taught to them (Epaphras is called a pistov" … diavkono", ―a
faithful minister‖) by one who is also described by the predicate of honor, ―a servant of
Christ Jesus‖ (4:12). Epaphras had come to visit Paul and, either voluntarily or because of
his arrest by the authorities, had shared the latter‘s imprisonment (Phlm 23). So he was not
free to return to the congregation when Paul‘s letter was sent. Instead it was entrusted to
Tychicus (4:7, 8) who was commissioned also to bring news of the apostle‘s experiences in
prison. No doubt the congregation would also wish to hear some encouraging news about
Epaphras, their leader, especially as he would not be returning with Tychicus and Onesimus
(4:9). Other members of the congregation were Philemon and his family (Phlm 1, 2)
including Archippus (Col 4:17) and Philemon‘s runaway slave Onesimus (4:9; Philem 11)
whom he hopes will be received by Philemon just as he, Paul, would be welcomed (Phlm
16, 17). (See the detailed relevant exegesis of these verses.)
    There are many allusions to the pagan past of the letter‘s recipients suggesting that
almost all of them were Gentile converts (Moule, 29, considers this can be established on
the basis of four arguments: [1] it is suggested by 1:12, 21, 27, ―where the terms are those
of outsiders being brought inside.‖ [2] There is a scarcity of OT allusions. [3] Distinctively
Gentile vices are mentioned in 3:5–7. [4] There is a near lack of references to the matter of
the reconciliation between Jews and Gentiles in the congregation; though note 3:11 and
4:11. (Cf J. Bradley, ―The Religious Life-Setting of the Epistle to the Colossians,‖ StBibT 2
[1972] [d] 17–36, especially 19). They are reminded that once they had been utterly out of
harmony with God, enmeshed in idolatry and slavery to sin: they were hostile to God in
mind and godless in their actions (1:21). They are also said to have been spiritually dead
because of their sins and ―the uncircumcision of their flesh‖—a statement which indicates
they were both heathen and godless (2:13).
    But Paul believed God had effected a mighty change in their lives: he had reconciled
them to himself in an earthshattering event, namely, Christ‘s physical death on the cross
(1:22); God had delivered them from a tyranny of darkness and transferred them into a
kingdom in which his beloved Son held sway (1:13). They now possessed redemption and
the forgiveness of their sins (1:14). Indeed, the assurance of the forgiveness of sins (which
is an important motif in the letter: 1:14; 2:13; 3:13) is riveted to the readers‘ minds and
consciences by means of graphic language: God had graciously forgiven (carisavmeno",
2:13) the Colossians all their trespasses. He had not only cancelled the debt, or signed IOU,
but also destroyed the document on which it was recorded. This he did by blotting out the
bond with its damning indictment against the readers and by nailing it to the cross when
Christ died. Further, God stripped the principalities and powers, evil forces which had kept
the Colossians in their evil grip, and divested them of their dignity and might. He exposed
to the universe their utter helplessness leading them in Christ in his triumphal procession
(2:13–15).
    The Colossians now had a hope so secure that it was laid up for them in heaven (1:5; cf.
v 23) where Christ was seated and where their thoughts and aspirations were to ascend
(3:1–4). That hope, which focused on Christ himself (1:27), had been the subject of the
apostolic announcement of Paul and his associates. When the gospel had first been
preached by Epaphras to the Colossians it had taken up a firm place in their hearts and lives
(1:5, 6). It had begun to bear fruit and to increase in their midst just as it was doing
elsewhere throughout the world (1:6).
    As Gentiles who had previously been without God and without hope they had been
united to Christ in his death, burial and resurrection (2:11, 12; 2:20; 3:1, 3). He was the
same person praised as the exalted Lord in creation and reconciliation in the magnificent
hymn of chapter 1:15–20. He was none other than God‘s anointed one at the center of the
mystery. That mystery formerly hidden for ages and generations had special reference to
them as Gentiles for they were now included along with Jews on an equal footing as
members of his body (1:26, 27). Thus they had his life within them and could look forward
to the day when they would share in the fullness of his glory. His revelation as Son of God
would be the time when they were manifested as the ―sons of God‖ (3:4).
Because the congregation had received Christ Jesus the Lord as their tradition
(parelavbete, 2:6) when they accepted the gospel at the hands of Epaphras, they are
admonished to conduct their lives as those who have been incorporated into Christ. As they
live under his lordship they are to abound in thanksgiving (note the references to this theme
at 1:3, 12; 2:7; 3:15, 16, 17; 4:2), grateful to God for his mighty actions on their behalf
(2:7). Since Christ Jesus was a more than adequate safeguard against the empty traditions
of men, let them see to it that their way of life and thought conform continually to his
teaching (2:6–8).
    The picture is thus drawn of a Christian congregation which is obedient to the apostolic
gospel. The report which Paul has received from Epaphras about the faith and love of the
Colossian Christians are grounds for heartfelt thanksgiving to God (1:4–6). Epaphras has
told the apostle of their ―love in the Spirit‖ (1:8), and Paul writes in warm terms as he tells
them he is delighted to learn of their orderly Christian lives and the stability of their faith in
Christ (2:5).



THE OCCASION OF THE LETTER
If the congregation‘s life and conduct are worthy of such praise what then is the occasion
for sending the letter? No doubt one of the reasons for Epaphras‘ journey to meet with Paul
and his willingness to share for a time the apostle‘s imprisonment (at Philem 23 he is
described as a ―fellow-prisoner‖) was his concern to inform him of the progress of the
gospel in the Lycus valley and so encourage the apostle. But probably the main reason for
his visit was to seek advice from Paul as to how to deal with the false teaching which had
arisen in Colossae and which, if it was allowed to continue unchecked, would threaten the
security of the church. Paul‘s letter is then written as a response to this urgent need. It is
possible that Epaphras could not cope with the specious arguments and feigned humility of
the false teachers and so needed the greater wisdom of the apostle. It has been suggested
that Archippus had been left in charge of the work at Colossae, and he is mentioned in
Colossians 4:17 as one who had received a ministry in the Lord, and in Philemon 2 as a
―fellow-soldier‖ of Paul (cf. Guthrie, Introduction, 162).



THE THREAT TO FAITH AND THE ―COLOSSIAN HERESY‖

A. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
The letter to the Colossians has been described as ―Paul‘s vigorous reaction to the news of
the strange teaching which was being inculcated at Colossae‖ (Bruce, 165). The apostle
became aware of the threatened danger and the need to rebut the error which lay at the heart
of this strange aberration of the apostolic kerygma. So he warns the community, which is
apparently unsuspecting and innocent, not to be misled by plausible but false arguments
(2:4). They are to be on their guard lest they are kidnaped from the truth and led into the
slavery of error (2:8). The congregation is urgently warned and admonished regarding the
distinction between true and false teaching.
    This erroneous teaching has normally been described as the ―Colossian heresy‖ and the
nature of it has been discussed for more than one hundred years since Lightfoot wrote his
important commentary on Colossians in 1875. There is still considerable difference of
opinion as to exactly what was this false teaching that threatened the peace and stability of
the Colossian Christians and their near neighbors. (For a bewildering variety of opinion as
to the identity of the opponents at Colossae see J. J. Gunther, St. Paul‘s Opponents and
Their Background. A Study of Apocalyptic and Jewish Sectarian Teachings [NovTSup 35;
Leiden: Brill, 1973] 3, 4, who lists forty-four different suggestions of nineteenth and
twentieth century NT scholars.)

B. WAS THERE A ―COLOSSIAN HERESY‖?

    Nowhere in the letter does Paul give a formal exposition of the heresy, and its chief
features can be detected only by piecing together and interpreting the apostle‘s positive
counterarguments. In fact, it has recently been questioned by Hooker (Christ, 315–31) as to
whether these counterarguments point to the existence of a ―Colossian heresy‖ at all. Paul
puts the Romans and Philippians on their guard against certain false teachings and wrong
practices (Rom 16:17–20; Phil 3:2, 18, 19) without therefore implying that these practices
had actually invaded the congregations in Rome and Philippi. Might he not be doing the
same thing in Colossians? Hooker points out that, unlike the situation with the Galatians,
there is no evidence that the church at Colossae had succumbed to distressing error (cf.
1:3–8; 2:1–5). It is argued that evidence is also lacking for the existence of false teaching
with regard to Christ. She claims there were no such heretics in the Colossian community
and that a more likely explanation of the situation is that young converts were under
external pressure to conform ―to the beliefs and practices of their pagan and Jewish
neighbours‖ (Christ, 329). Paul‘s statements about the uniqueness and supremacy of
Christ‘s work in creation and redemption (1:15–20) are a reminder that they need look
nowhere else than to Christ for a completion of salvation and his exhortations are to be
understood as general warnings.
Hooker‘s thesis contains much that is appealing: it has stressed again Paul‘s positive
statements about the life and stability of the congregation (1:3–8; 2:5) and reminded us that
there is nothing in Colossians like the strong indignation found in Galatians where Paul
sees the very foundations of the faith being shaken. Further, Hooker has warned that in
attempting to reconstruct the situation behind Paul‘s writings there is the danger of arguing
in a circle (Christ, 319). Perhaps therefore one has to speak in terms of tendencies rather
than a clear-cut system with precise and definite points. Nevertheless in our judgment her
thesis has not taken sufficient account of the language of chapter 2:8–23, with its references
to ―fullness,‖ specific ascetic injunctions (such as ―Do not handle! Do not taste! Don‘t even
touch!‖ v 21), its statements about the Colossian Christians being taken to task over food
and holy days, and its unusual phrases which are best interpreted as catchwords of Paul‘s
opponents (see the exegesis of 2:8–23). One also wonders whether her thesis really
accounts for the emphasis on ―realized eschatology‖ in the letter. Her contention, on the
other hand, that the letter as a whole, especially chapter 1:15–20, is to be read as a polemic
against the Jewish Torah (―both creation and redemption are completed in Christ because
he has replaced the Jewish Law,‖ and ―Jesus Christ had indeed replaced the Torah as the
revelation both of God‘s glory and of his purpose for the universe and for mankind. It is
this fundamental truth which is expressed in Colossians …,‖ in Christ, 329, 331), is rather
surprising in the light of the absence of terms such as ―law‖ and ―command‖ in the epistle
(cf. H. Weiss, ―The Law in the Epistle to the Colossians,‖ CBQ 34 [1972] 294, and
Schweizer, ThBer 5 [1976] 174).

C. SOME DISTINGUISHING MARKS OF THE ―HERESY‖

    Although Paul gives us no formal exposition of the false teaching there are several
crucial passages where he appears to be quoting slogans or catchwords of the opponents
and these serve as invaluable clues in any attempt to understand the nature of what is being
advocated at Colossae. To begin with the teaching was set forth as ―philosophy‖
(filosofiva, 2:8) based on venerable tradition (the term paravdosi", ―tradition,‖ was used
apparently to draw attention to the antiquity, dignity and revelational character of the
teaching; Paul, however, rejects any suggestion of divine origin: it was the tradition of men,
pure and simple) and was supposed to impart true knowledge and insight (2:18, 23).
    The following phrases appear to be catchwords of the opponents which Paul quotes in
his attack on the false teaching (for a detailed examination of these expressions see the
relevant exegetical sections):
2:9 (cf. 1:19), ―all the fullness‖ (pa`n to; plhvrwma)
2:18 ―delighting in humility and the worship of angels‖ (qevlwn ejn tapeinofrosuvnh/ kai;
    qrhskeiva/ tw`n ajggevlwn)
2:18 ―[things] which he has seen upon entering‖ (a} eJovraken ejmbateuvwn)
2:21 ―Don‘t handle, don‘t taste, don‘t even touch‖ (mh; a{yh/, mhde; leuvsh/, mhde; qivlh/")
2:23 ―voluntary worship‖ (ejqeloqrhskiva/), ―humility‖ (tapeinofrosuvnh/), and ―severe
    treatment of the body‖ (ajfeidiva/ swvmato").
In addition to these citations the apostle asserts that the false teachers took the members of
the congregation to task over food regulations and with respect to holy days (2:16, 20, 21).
Observance of these taboos in the ―philosophy‖ was related to obedient submission to ―the
elemental spirits of the world‖ (ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou, 2:8, 20), an enigmatic phrase
that also appears in Galatians (4:3 cf. v 9; for a brief survey of the main lines along which
this phrase has been interpreted see 129–132).

D. INTERPRETING THESE DISTINGUISHING MARKS
How then are these unusual features to be understood? What was the nature or, if one
cannot be too specific, what were the tendencies of the false teachers? No complete
agreement has been achieved among scholars (Kümmel, Introduction, 339) concerning the
nature of the teaching. Basically, however, it seems to have been Jewish. Evidence of this is
seen in the part played in the ―philosophy‖ by legal ordinances, food regulations, the
sabbath, new moon, and other prescriptions of the Jewish calendar (cf. Bruce, Paul, 413).
Reference is made to circumcision (2:11) though it does not appear to feature as one of the
legal requirements.
     But what kind of Judaism? Was it some sort of ―Jewish nonconformity‖ or
―nonconformist Judaism,‖ to borrow Matthew Black‘s recently popularized wider term
(The Scrolls and Christian Origins [New York: Scribner‘s, 1961] 166; cited by Bruce,
Paul, 416; note especially the latter‘s treatment of the ―Colossian heresy,‖ 412–17, to
which I am indebted)? It does not seem to have been the more straightforward Judaism
against which the Galatian churches had to be warned, a Judaism probably brought in by
emissaries from Judea. Bruce (Paul, 413) suggests the Colossian heresy was ―more
probably a Phrygian development in which a local variety of Judaism had been fused with a
philosophy of non-Jewish origin—an early and simple form of gnosticism.‖ The
synagogues in Phrygia seem to have been exposed to the influences of Hellenistic
speculation and with these the tendencies to religious syncretism. Ramsay (Cities, 2. 637,
passim) drew attention to the example—no doubt an extreme case—of a Jewish lady who
was both honorary ruler of the synagogue and priestess of the imperial cult!
     In the Colossian false teaching a special place was apparently given to angels, as agents
in creation and in the giving of the law. One form of belief in angelic agency in creation
appears in Philo (cf. H. Chadwick, ―St. Paul and Philo of Alexandria,‖ BJRL 48 [1965–66]
286–307, especially 303), another in Justin Martyr. The latter referred to certain Jewish
teachers who took the words ―let us make man‖ (Gen 1:26) and ―as one of us‖ (Gen 3:22)
to indicate ―God spoke to angels, or that the human frame was the workmanship of angels‖
(Justin, Dialogue 62; cf. Bruce, Paul, 413).
     The angelic agency in the giving of the law is mentioned by Paul in Galatians 3:19, as
well as in Acts 7:53 and Hebrews 2:2, and it is attested in contemporary Jewish literature
(cf. the earlier Jub 1:29 as well as the Mek. on Exod 20:18; Sifre on Num 12:5; and Pesiq.
R. 21). In the Colossian false teaching these angels were to be placated by keeping strict
legal observances. The breaking of the law incurred their displeasure and brought the
lawbreaker into debt and bondage to them (cf. Col 2:12–15). These angels are included
among the stoicei`a (a term already used with reference to angels at Gal 4:3, 9), and were
―not only elemental beings but dominant ones as well—principalities and powers, lords of
the planetary spheres, sharers in the divine plenitude (plhvrwma) and intermediaries
between heaven and earth‖ (Bruce, Paul, 414). Apparently they were thought to control the
lines of communication between God and man. All this was presented as a form of
advanced teaching for a spiritual elite. Epaphras had instructed the Colossian Christians
only in the first steps and they were now being urged to press on in wisdom and knowledge
to attain to true ―fullness‖ (plhvrwma). To do this they must follow a path of rigorous
asceticism until finally they become citizens of that spiritual world, the realm of light.
In the following sections, although not intended as a history of research, the major scholarly
contributions over the last hundred years to an understanding of the Colossian ―philosophy‖
are examined. In this treatment I am particularly indebted to the survey of Francis and
Meeks (Conflict, especially 209–218). We begin with:

E. LIGHTFOOT: ESSENE JUDAISM OF A GNOSTIC KIND

    Lightfoot (71–111; cf. 347–417) regarded the Colossian heresy as a form of Judaizing
 which he traced back to the Essenes. He argued (a) that Essene Judaism was
―gnostic,‖ marked by the intellectual exclusiveness and speculative tenets of gnosticism
(this term expresses ―the simplest and most elementary conceptions‖ of theosophic
speculation, shadowy mysticism and spiritual intermediaries; it does not, according to
Lightfoot, refer to ―a distinct designation of any sect or sects at this early date‖; cf . Francis
and Meeks, Conflict, 209); (b) that this kind of Jewish thought and practice had established
itself in this part of Asia Minor during the apostolic age; and (c) that the Colossian heresy
was a type of gnostic Judaism, since it was clearly Jewish in its basis, and was marked by
several distinctive features of gnosticism: an intellectual elite (with its insistence on
wisdom and knowledge), cosmogonic speculation (with an emphasis on angelic mediation,
the plhvrwma, and so on), asceticism and calendrical regulations (cf. Bruce, Paul, 415).
    More recently the discovery of the Qumran material with its points of contact in
phraseology (e.g. ―his body of flesh,‖ tw`/ swvmati th`" sarko;" aujtou`, at Col 1:22; cf. 2:11
and note 1QpHab 9:1, 2) and its references to a sect that observed a heterodox calendar, its
sabbath regulations, food distinctions, asceticism, an insistence on wisdom and knowledge,
involving a special understanding of the world, of angels, etc, have led some to consider
that the Colossian philosophy was an offshoot of the teaching of the Qumran community.
So W. D. Davies (―Paul and the Dead Sea Scrolls: Flesh and Spirit.‖ The Scrolls and the
New Testament, ed. K. Stendahl [New York: Harper, 1957] 166–69) maintained that there
were clear allusions to the Qumran writings recognizable in the ascetic rules and the
worship of the principalities and powers, while P. Benoit (―Qumran and the New
Testament.‖ Paul and Qumran. Studies in New Testament Exegesis, ed. J.
Murphy-O‘Connor [London: Chapman, 1968] 17) was of the opinion that circumcision, the
exact observance of food laws and the festal calendar together with speculation about the
angelic powers coincided with the views of the heterodox Jews living by the Dead Sea.
But in spite of the striking parallels one cannot identify the Colossian heresy as a variety of
Essenism or of the Qumran doctrine. For example, we do not find in the letter to the
Colossians any reference to an insistence on ceremonial washings, which seem to have
played a significant role among the Essenes in general and at Qumran in particular.
Baptism is mentioned in Colossians not as the true counterpart to heretical washings but in
connection with the ―circumcision made without hands‖ (Col 2: 11, 12; E. M. Yamauchi,
―Sectarian Parallels. Qumran and Colossae,‖ BSac 121 [1964] 141–52, after a careful
assessment of the evidence from the scrolls, concluded that the Colossian heresy was not to
be equated with Essene heterodoxy. Some of its features were quite dissimilar to Qumran‘s
views, while others had greater affinities with the Gnostics of Chenoboskion; apparently
the Colossian heresy reflected a stage of doctrinal evolution subsequent to Jewish
heterodoxy and before the development of later Gnosticism).

F. DIBELIUS: A PAGAN MYSTERY CULT

    One of the most influential contributions to an understanding of the Colossian heresy
was that of Martin Dibelius in an essay which first appeared in 1917 (the English
translation, ―The Isis Initiation in Apuleius and Related Initiatory Rites,‖ has been
published in Conflict, 61–121). Beginning his investigation with the mystery cults Dibelius
examined the unusual term ejmbateuvw (―enter‖ found at Col 2:18; see the relevant exegesis
of this verse) used to describe initiates entering the sanctuary so as to consult the oracle on
completion of the rite. From the inscriptional data discovered in the sanctuary of Apollo at
Claros, Dibelius argued that the term signified mystery initiation. The Colossian Christians,
without abandoning their Christianity, joined with their non-Christian teachers in a cultic
life given over to the powers and were initiated into a cosmic mystery devoted to the
elements (stoicei`a). The Colossian heresy was a Gnostic mystery; since the practice of
this strange cult was independent of the church Dibelius considers this to have been an
instance of pre-Christian Gnosticism.
Dibelius‘ preoccupation with ejmbateuvw (―enter‖) in the above-mentioned inscriptions is
the most significant factor in his reconstruction of the Colossian heresy. No importance is
attached to the fact that the Clarion Apollo was an oracle sanctuary and no oracle is
mentioned in Colossians. Also because Dibelius fixed his attention on the independent,
pagan character of the cult he rejects any Jewish influence at Colossae (note the critique of
Dibelius in Conflict, 210, 211, where it is also argued that Lohse [especially 127–31], while
recognizing the Colossian allusions to apparent Jewish tradition, follows Dibelius‘ model
faithfully. Accordingly, the regulations mentioned in chapter 2:21, etc point neither to
Essenism nor heretical Judaism but to a Gnostic or pre-Gnostic mystery cult: some
Colossian Christians believed initiation and submission to the powers would perhaps open
the way to Christ).

G. BORNKAMM: A SYNCRETISM OF GNOSTICIZED JUDAISM AND PAGAN ELEMENTS
The important article of Günther Bornkamm, first published in 1948 and translated into
English as ―The Heresy of Colossians‖ (Conflict, 123–46) concluded that the Colossian
false teaching was a pronounced syncretistic religion. Bornkamm adduced material from a
wide range of religious movements in order to throw light on its various facets. He argued
that the root of the heresy was to be found in a gnosticized Judaism, into which Jewish and
Iranian-Persian elements, in addition to Chaldean astrological influences, had been
uniquely synthesized and linked with the Christian faith. Inasmuch as Bornkamm
understands the heresy as Gnosticism of a Jewish origin he is closer to Lightfoot than to
Dibelius (Francis and Meeks, Conflict, 211; Conzelmann, 132, and H. M. Schenke, ―Der
Widerstreit gnostischer und kirchlicher Christologie im Spiegel des Kolosserbriefes,‖; ZTK
61 [1964] 391–403, generally follow Bornkamm‘s reconstruction of the heresy;
Conzelmann understands Gnosticism as a broad spiritual movement, not properly a
religion, while both he and Schenke consider the Gnostic opponents in the church
understood themselves to be Christians). His approach to the practice of a mystery,
however, is similar to that of Dibelius, except that Bornkamm recognized the difficulty of
Dibelius‘ presentation which located the source and actual practice of the heresy outside the
church. Bornkamm therefore understood the mystery as being within the congregation. The
heresy was a Christian error, the decisive characteristic of which was the opponents‘
teaching about the principalities and powers: Bornkamm postulates that the opponents gave
Christ an integrated place among these powers. But Colossians does not say this (Francis
and Meeks, Conflict, 212).
    Further questions about this reconstruction have also been raised: granted the
syncretistic nature of the religious situation in Phrygia (and Martin, NCB, 4, 5, has drawn
attention to this with references to the cult of Cybele, the great mother-goddess of Asia,
which flourished in Phrygia [cf. Strabo]; the widespread worship of Isis in Paul‘s day [cf. R.
E. Witt, Isis in the Graeco-Roman World, London: Thames and Hudson, 1971] 130, 131);
the linking of Iranian cosmology and astrology with the redemption-mystery of the religion
of Mithras and its early arrival in the Asia Minor region (as well as the syncretistic Judaism
already noted) one can legitimately ask whether such a composite religion as portrayed by
Bornkamm actually existed. Even if some of Bornkamm‘s parallels to the Colossian
situation are apt, should we suppose they are integrated in the way he has suggested?
Francis and Meeks (Conflict, 212) point out that because models are not identical with the
data, ―they inevitably incorporate features not in the data‖; Bornkamm postulates that the
opponents gave Christ an integrated place among the powers, but Colossians says nothing
of this. Bandstra (Dimensions, 330), for his part, suggests that the unusual nature of the
syncretistic religion postulated by Bornkamm ―results from a methodology in which
inferences are made from the givens of the epistle that are not actually supported by the
course of the argument in the epistle.‖
Lähnemann (Kolosserbrief) combined features of Lightfoot‘s model (Phrygian Judaism)
with that of Dibelius (the mystery cult) although he excluded Gnosticism. So the Jewish
community in the Lycus valley region provided the sectarian setting for a combination of
factors similar to ―Phrygian nature religion with its ecstatic rigorism, Iranian mythology
regarding the elements, Greek wisdom and mystery religion‖ (Francis and Meeks, Conflict,
214). The opponents at Colossae were non-Christian who incorporated Christ into their
plhvrwma.

H. LYONNET: JUDAIZING SYNCRETISM
Lyonnet, partly by way of response to Dibelius‘ reconstruction, considers it is unwise to
build a whole theory of a pagan mystery at Colossae on the basis of one term, ejmbateuvw
(―enter‖). Turning to the Qumran material one finds an interest in calendar, dietary
regulations, visions and angels. He suggests that the expression ―worship of angels‖
denotes the pattern of regulations of the moral life intended to honor the angels through
whom the Mosaic law was given. Lyonnet rejects a pagan Gnostic background for the
vocabulary of Colossians. Some terms (e.g. plhvrwma, ―fullness,‖ and sw`ma, ―body‖) are
simply vocabulary familiar to Paul drawn from popular usage, while other terms (ajrcaiv,
―rulers‖; ejxousijai, ―authorities,‖ etc) have a Jewish background, as may be noted from
comparable language in Galatians and 2 Corinthians. Lyonnet thus chooses a Jewish model
over against a pagan one and this, according to Francis and Meeks (Conflict, 213) appears
to presuppose a widely held view of early Christian history, namely, that Jewishness is to
be identified with both temporal priority and doctrinal purity. Apparently because this
theory appears to be self-evident Lyonnet does not give reasons as to why ―the ‗Jewish‘
possibility is more probable than the ‗pagan‘.‖

I. FRANCIS: JEWISH CHRISTIAN MYSTICAL ASCETICISM

    A fresh approach to this problem of the Colossian philosophy was made by Francis in
his 1962 article on Colossians 2:18 (reprinted in Conflict, 163–95; this was followed by a
further paper, Conflict, 197–207).He examined the controversy as a whole, and especially
this verse, ―against the background of ascetic and mystic trends of piety‖ (Conflict, 166).
    Francis demonstrated that tapeinofrosuvnh (2:18, 23) was a term used by the
Colossian opponents to denote ascetic practices (it was frequently employed in Jewish and
Christian literature to denote fasting and other bodily rigors: see on 2:18) that were
effectual for receiving visions of heavenly mysteries (Conflict, 167–71). Regarding the
word ejmbateuvw he argued it did not seem to denote ―initiation‖ in the Claros inscriptions
(as Dibelius had claimed) but that its specific significance in those inscriptions was
impossible to determine. Instead the term was used broadly in the OT and the papyri with
the connotation of ―entering into possession of‖ something (for details see on 2:18), and
that in conjunction with tapeinofrosuvnh at Colossians 2:18 it had to do with some kind
of heavenly entrance (Conflict, 171–76, 197–207).
Regarding the phrase qrhskeiva tw`n ajggevlwn (―worship of angels‖) although the
dominant interpretation since Dibelius had understood this as an objective genitive,
signifying the worship directed to angels, and was therefore taken to be evidence of a pagan
feature in the heresy which must be syncretistic rather than entirely Jewish, Francis argued
convincingly that the phrase ought to be taken as a subjective genitive, ―the angels‘ worship
(sc. of God),‖ so indicating that the entrance into heaven reached its climax in joining in the
angelic worship of God. According to Francis and others who have developed his
arguments such a liturgical climax could be parallelled in many Jewish/Christian sources of
ascetic-mystical piety. These sources were also helpful in illuminating the concepts of
―humility‖ and ―entering‖ (Conflict, 176–81; cf. Bandstra, Dimensions, 331). If Francis is
right in his understanding of this enigmatic phrase, and we consider a good case has been
made out by him (see on 2:18), then the only reference used in support of the idea that the
principalities and powers were actually worshiped by the false teachers at Colossae falls to
the ground.
     According to Bandstra‘s development of Francis‘ arguments a related Jewish tradition
(as evidenced in 1QH, 4 Ezra, 2 Apoc Bar and the Apoc Abr) expressly affirmed that
―creation, present fellowship with God, and, in some instances, judgment, are the result of
God‘s personal and unmediated action‖ (Bandstra, Dimensions, 332, 333, his italics). At
Qumran, for example, in addition to a fellowship with angels at the end-time, the members
of the community believed themselves to be joined with the angels in common praise of
God as part of their present experience (1QH 3:21–23; 11:10–14; cf. 1QS 11:7, 8; 4QDb).
The elect have direct fellowship with the angels and the heavenly world without needing
anyone as a mediator to bridge the distance between God and man. Bandstra carries the
argument concerning Colossians 2:18 a step further (drawing in ascetic-mystical parallels
to 2:2, 3 as well) and posits the hypothesis that the opponents at Colossae might have
affirmed that a divine intermediary was not needed to achieve their mystical experiences;
and that God, personally, by unmediated action, effected creation and gave them immediate
understanding of the cosmic and redemptive mysteries. Angels would be important in such
a system as God‘s messengers to give instructions concerning the requirements for and
participation in the visionary experiences (Dimensions, 339). This kind of opposition could
account for Paul‘s pointed insistence that Christ the Lord is mediator of creation and
redemption. He is the one in whom all the invisible powers were created and who is head
over them all.
Francis‘ presentation treats the error at Colossae within the bounds of Jewish-Hellenistic
piety as marked out by Lightfoot, though he makes no use of Essene-Gnostic labels. The
asceticism, cosmology and exclusiveness which Lightfoot isolated are taken up in Francis‘
model of Jewish asceticmystical piety. The preoccupation with mystery initiation stemming
from Dibelius‘ reconstructions is rejected as resting on a mistake. Also, the almost
universal assumption that the Colossian opponents worshiped angels is regarded as the
repetition of an ancient error resting on meager, irrelevant evidence. At the same time
observations made concerning correspondences between the text of Colossians and
Hellenistic religious phenomena are not necessarily rejected—whether they are called
Gnostic or not.
J. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS

    In the midst of such a bewildering variety of hypotheses concerning the nature of the
Colossian heresy (assuming it is even right to speak of a ―Colossian heresy‖ at all) it might
well be asked whether certainty is attainable. Many factors restrict our understanding. We
are outsiders to the original communication. The writer could presuppose that the readers
knew certain things. Others could be brought to their attention by the merest allusion. Some
matters that are explicit may be peculiar to the relation between the writer and the
Colossians.
    But in spite of such qualifications (cf. Francis and Meeks, Conflict, 215–17) it does
appear that recent scholarly work on the Jewish-Christian ascetic and mystical background
has been helpful in illuminating the meaning of several of these difficult expressions in the
polemical sections of Colossians (2:16–23). This is not to suggest, however, that (1) Paul‘s
language (even when quoting the phrases of his opponents) has been fully comprehended,
or that (2) the false teaching was simply Jewish without any admixture of pagan elements
such as appear to have been prevalent in Phrygia.
In the light of these observations we turn to:



PAUL‘S HANDLING OF THE COLOSSIAN PHILOSOPHY
    Although one is not unmindful of a build-up in Paul‘s presentation in chapter 1 (and we
shall have cause to return to this shortly), it is not until chapter 2:4 (―I am saying this in
order that no one may deceive you with persuasive language‖) that the apostle expressly
points to the dangers facing the congregation. He is aware of the methods employed by the
false teachers and issues a strong warning to the Colossians to be on their guard (blevpete,
2:8) lest the proponents carry them away from the truth into the slavery of error
(sulagwgevw, to ―carry off as booty,‖ at 2:8 is both a rare word and a vivid one, showing
just how seriously Paul regarded the evil designs of those seeking to influence the
congregation): these spiritual confidence tricksters were trying to ensnare the congregation
―through philosophy and empty deceit‖ (dia; th`" filosofiva" kai; kenh`" ajpavth", 2:8).
Although the false teachers had set forth their philosophy as ―tradition‖ (paravdosi", 2:8),
thereby drawing attention to its antiquity, dignity and revelational character, Paul rejects
any suggestion of divine origin. It was a human fabrication (described as ―the tradition of
men‖) that stood over against the apostolic tradition which centered on ―Christ Jesus as
Lord.‖
    Paul‘s reply to this ―human tradition‖ (2:8) is ―to set over against it the tradition of
Christ—not merely the tradition which stems from the teaching of Christ but the tradition
which finds its embodiment in him‖ (cf. Bruce, Paul, 417; at 2:6 the verb parelavbete,
―received,‖ is a semi-technical term to denote the receiving of a tradition, and here the
apostle states the readers have received Christ as their tradition). He is the image of the
invisible God (1:15), the one who incorporates the fullness of the divine essence (2:9).
Those who are incorporated into him have come to fullness of life in him who is master
over every principality and power. They need not seek, since they cannot find, perfection
anywhere else but in him. It is in him, the one in whose death, burial and resurrection they
have been united (2:11, 12), that the totality of wisdom and knowledge is concentrated and
made available to his people—not to an elite only, but to all. Further, he is the sole
mediator—and a mediator was certainly needed—between God and mankind.
The apostle‘s criticisms of the advocates of the Colossian philosophy with their false
notions and aberrant behavior are trenchant, even devastating (2:16–23). Because of their
false legalism the proponents failed to recognize God‘s good gifts and his purpose in giving
them, namely, that all should be enjoyed and consumed through proper use (v 22). The
things covered by the taboos were perishable objects of the material world, destined to pass
away when used. The taboos themselves, which belonged to a transitory order (v 17), were
merely human inventions that lay no claim to absoluteness but stood over against the
revelation of the will of God (note the exegesis of ―according to human commands and
teaching,‖ v 22). To place oneself under rules and regulations like those mentioned in verse
21 is to go back into slavery again—under the personal forces overthrown by Christ (v 20).
As death breaks the bond which binds a subject to his ruler so dying with Christ severs the
bond which bound the Colossians to the slavery of the principalities and powers. And they
must not go back on that life-shattering event. Although the prohibitions (of which v 21
contains illustrations: ―Don‘t handle, don‘t taste, don‘t even touch!‖) carry a reputation for
wisdom in the spheres of voluntary worship, humility and severe treatment of the body,
they were without any value whatsoever. Such energetic religious endeavors could not hold
the flesh in check. Quite the reverse. These man-made regulations actually pandered to the
flesh (v 23).
     Regarding the false teachers themselves the apostle‘s words are just as severe: anyone
who laid claim to exalted heavenly experiences or visions as a prelude to fresh revelations
was puffed up. Such people apparently claimed that they were directed by the mind. ―Yes,‖
says Paul, ―a mind of flesh!‖ If they boasted they were acquainted with divine ―fullness,‖
then all they were full of was their own pride (v 18)! Worst of all, the self-inflation and
arrogance in these private religious experiences come from not maintaining contact with
Christ, the head (v 19). No doubt those who sought to make inroads into the community
presupposed that they were Christians. Indeed, how else could they have expected to have
their views taken seriously? But they face the most serious of condemnations: they are
severed from the very one who is the source of life and unity.
     In his reply to the Colossian heresy Paul expounds the doctrine of the cosmic Christ
more fully and systematically than in his earlier epistles. Hints certainly appear in Romans
(8:19–22) and 1 Corinthians (1:24; 8:6; 2:6–10) but a range of points is spelled out in more
detail in Colossians 1:15–20 and 2:13–15. The former is a magnificent hymnic passage in
praise of Christ as the Lord in creation and reconciliation. Predicates and activities
employed in the OT and Judaism of the personalized Wisdom of God are applied to the one
who had been so ignominiously crucified only a few years before. Far from the angels
playing a part in creation, Christ is the one through whom all things were created, including
the principalities and powers which figured so prominently in the Colossian heresy. All
things have been made in him as the sphere (ejn aujtw`/, 1:16) and through him as the agent
dij aujtou`, v 16). Indeed, he is unique for he is the ultimate goal of all creation (eij" aujtovn ,
v 16). And this magnificent passage emphasizes that even the cosmic principalities and
powers, from the highest to the lowest, are all alike subject to Christ.
     The hymn goes on to celebrate him as head of the new creation (vv 18–20): here too he
is the ―beginning,‖ this time as the ―first-born from the dead‖; his is a primacy in
resurrection. In the old creation he was the ―head‖ of every principality and power (2:10) in
the sense of being their author and ruler; in the new creation he is ―head‖ of his body, the
church, not simply in the sense of ruler or origin, but because he is so vitally united with his
people that the life which they now live is derived from his life, that life which he lives as
first-born from the dead.
     It would be foolish for the Colossians to be misled by the false teachers into thinking it
was necessary to obey the angelic powers through whom the law was given as though they
controlled the lines of communication between God and man. That way was now controlled
by Christ, the one mediator. The principalities and powers had held the Colossians in their
grip through their possession of a signed IOU, a bond with its damning indictments. But
God stripped these evil authorities, divesting them of their dignity and might, and had
cancelled the bond, nailing it to the cross when Christ died. God exposed to the universe the
utter helplessness of these principalities, leading them in Christ in his triumphal procession.
He paraded these powerless powers so that all the world might see the magnitude of his
victory (2:13–15).
Let those who through faith-union with Christ shared his death and resurrection not serve
those elemental spirits which Christ had conquered. The Colossian heresy with all its
taboos was ―no syllabus of advanced wisdom; it bore all the marks of immaturity‖ (Bruce,
Paul, 418). Why should those who had come of age in Christ go back to the apron strings
of infancy? Why should those whom Christ had freed submit again to this yoke of
bondage?
     In his handling of the Colossian heresy Paul places his emphasis on realized
eschatology (see especially on 2:12; 3:1–4). Within the ―already-not yet‖ tension the stress
falls upon the former, called forth by the circumstances of the letter. The Colossians have a
hope laid up for them in heaven (1:5; cf. 3:1–4), they have been fitted for a share in the
inheritance of the saints in light (1:12), having already been delivered from a tyranny of
darkness and transferred into the kingdom of God‘s beloved Son (1:13). Not only did they
die with Christ; they were also raised with him (2:12; 3:1; cf. v 3). The ―already‖ of
salvation needed to be asserted again and again over against those who were interested in
―fullness‖ and the heavenly realm, but who had false notions about them, believing they
could be reached by legalistic observances, a knowledge for the elite, visionary experiences
and the like. The readers, therefore, were instructed that Christ had done all that was
necessary for their salvation. They had died with Christ, been raised with him and given
new life with him. Let them now zealously seek the things above (3:1, 2), that new order
centered on the exalted Christ, and let them as a consequence show that true
heavenly-mindedness meant they would be of the utmost earthly use (note the following
injunctions of vv 5, 8, 12 and 3:18—4:1).



THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE LETTER
    Up to this point it has been assumed that the letter to the Colossians was a genuine
composition of Paul, written by him, or at least at his dictation, and sent out in his name.
This view does not rule out the possibility of Paul utilizing other material, such as chapter
1:15–20 or even chapter 2:13–15 (for a discussion see the relevant exegetical sections). Not
all, however, are convinced that the letter came from Paul‘s hand, either directly or
indirectly, and their reasons are examined below (on the history of the problem see Percy,
Probleme, 5–15, and Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 12–28).
    The tradition that Colossians is a genuine Pauline epistle stands on good ground. The
later Church fathers accepted it (Irenaeus, Adv Haer 3.14.1; Tertullian, De Praescr Haer 7;
Clement of Alexandria, Strom 1.1) and there was no dispute over its authorship in the first
decades, even if the allusions to the letter in the earlier part of the second century are not
entirely clear. (It appears to have been used as early as Justin, Dialogue 85.2; 138.2.)
Marcion included it in his canonical list, and it is also found in the Muratorian canon. The
letter itself is thought to confirm this, as Paul‘s name appears at both the beginning (1:1)
and the end (4:18).
The first significant denial of Paul‘s authorship in recent times came in 1838 when E. T.
Mayerhoff claimed to have found in Colossians un-Pauline thoughts, evidences of
disputation with the second century Cerinthus and a dependence on Ephesians. The main
plank of F. C. Baur and the Tübingen school‘s theories was the alleged evidence that the
heresy combated in the epistle was second-century Gnosticism. Accordingly the case for
Pauline authorship was thought to have been disproved.
    Although few scholars have followed the lead of Mayerhoff in his assertions about the
letter‘s alleged dependence on Ephesians, F. C. Synge (St. Paul‘s Epistle to the Ephesians:
A Theological Commentary. [London: S.P.C.K. 1941] 70–75) has (recently) championed
the theory, regarding Colossians as a pale and inadequate imitation of Ephesians (which is
considered a genuine Pauline letter). The style of Ephesians is said to be far superior to that
of Colossians; in parallel passages (e.g. Eph 2:12, 13 and Col 1:20, 21) it is argued that the
material of the former is more aptly suited to its context, while theological concepts such as
―perfection‖ and ―unity‖ are more primitive in Ephesians than in Colossians. But Synge‘s
position fails to account for the many places where an advance in thought or a relationship
of linguistic dependence can be more easily traced to Ephesians than to Colossians (cf.
Polhill, RevExp 70 [1973] 441). Other hypotheses have been suggested to explain the
relationship between the two letters: Ephesian dependence on Colossians (cf. Goodspeed,
Mitton, Ochel, Beare), mutual interdependence (Holtzmann, Coutts), or that neither epistle
is directly dependent on the other (Klijn)! (For an overview of the various hypotheses see
Polhill, RevExp 70 [1973] 439–50.) But the question of the authenticity of Colossians must
be decided on other grounds and so we turn to the two major issues in the discussion, the
one literary, the other theological.

A. THE LANGUAGE AND STYLE OF COLOSSIANS

    Many of the formal features of Colossians show similarities with the other Pauline
letters. The connections involve the structure of the epistle such as the introduction (1:1–2)
and the conclusion (4:18), the thanksgiving prayer (1:3–8), connecting words and phrases
which introduce instructional expositions and exhortatory conclusions (note the expression
qejlw ga;r uJma`" eijdevnai [―For I want you to know‖], 2:1; and the uses of ou\n [―therefore‖]
at 2:6, 16; 3:1, 5, and elsewhere), as well as the list of messages and greetings (cf. 4:8, 10,
12, 15).
Many expressions used in Colossians show decidedly Pauline peculiarities of style (note
esp. Percy, Probleme, 36–66, Kümmel, Introduction, 341, 342, Lohse, 84–91), for
example, the superfluous use of kaiv (―and‖) after dia; tou`to (―therefore,‖ 1:9; cf. 1 Thess
2:13; 3:5; Rom 13:6, etc); in phrases like oiJ a{gioi aujtou` (―his saints,‖ 1:26; cf. 1 Thess
3:13; 2 Thess 1:10) and ejn mevrei (―in regard to,‖ 2:16; cf. 2 Cor 3:10; 9:3); as well as in
verbs such as carivzomai meaning to ―forgive‖ (2:13; 3:13; cf. 2 Cor 2:7, 10; 12:13). The
similarities and points of contact extend into the theological terminology, such as the
expressions ―in Christ‖ (1:2, 4, 28), ―in the Lord‖ (3:18, 20; 4:7, 17) or ―with Christ‖ (2:12,
20; 3:1, 3); expositions about being united with Christ in baptism (2:11, 12); statements
about being freed from the compulsive power of the regulations (2:14, 20, 21); concerning
the contrast between the old and the new man (3:5–17); and also regarding the relation
between the indicative and the imperative in the exhortations (3:5–17).
    On the other hand, there are linguistic differences between Colossians and the other
Pauline letters which are worthy of attention (see Lohse, 85–88, for details). In all there are
thirty-four words appearing in Colossians but nowhere else in the NT, twenty-eight words
which reappear in the NT but not in the other Pauline letters (not taking into account 2 Thess
and the Pastorals), ten words which Colossians has in common only with Ephesians and a
further fifteen appearing in Colossians and Ephesians as well as in the rest of the NT, but not
in the other Pauline letters. Before coming to conclusions too quickly, several important
factors need to be kept in mind. First, a good number of the words noted in these statistics
appear either in the hymnic paragraph (though on the question of its authorship see 40–42)
or in the interaction with the false teaching. It is not surprising, then, that unusual terms
should appear either as catchwords of the Colossian ―philosophy‖ or as part of the author‘s
polemic. Second, Lohse (86) has drawn attention to compound words in Colossians which
are to be compared with similar compounds in the other Pauline letters (e.g.
ajntanaplhrovw, 1:24; prosanaplhrovw, 2 Cor 9:12; 11:9). Further, it must be remembered
that hapax legomena and other unusual expressions turn up in considerable numbers in the
other Pauline letters (cf. Percy, Probleme, 17, 18; Galatians, for example, has thirty-one
words appearing nowhere else in the New Testament). The nonappearance of certain
Pauline theological terms such as ―sin‖ (in the singular), ―righteousness‖ and related words,
―law,‖ ―salvation,‖ ―believe,‖ etc is not decisive. In other Pauline letters, occasionally one
or more of these words does not appear or is strikingly infrequent: ―righteousness‖ turns up
in 1 Corinthians only at 1:30 and not at all in 1 Thessalonians. The verb ―justify‖ does not
occur in 1 Thessalonians, Philippians or in 2 Corinthians while ―law‖ also is absent from 2
Corinthians. Likewise ―salvation‖ does not appear in Galatians or in 1 Corinthians.
    The absence of one or other word or concept may be due to the different subject matter
being discussed in the particular letter. Schweizer (22; cf. Lohse, 87) considers it is quite
peculiar that the very terms which could be expected to occur in a confrontation with
legalistic doctrine are actually those which are missing: ―sin‖ (in the singular),
―righteousness,‖ ―justify,‖ ―believe‖ (an appropriate response might be that if these terms
are so obvious in such a context why does not Paul‘s disciple [possibly Timothy, according
to Schweizer] include them in his argument?).
Recent writers have drawn attention to the characteristic features of the letter‘s style, as
distinct from its vocabulary (Lohse, 88–90; Bujard, Untersuchungen; cf. Percy, Probleme,
18: ―the real problems concerning the form of the letter lie completely within the area of
style‖). Thus we note combined expressions belonging to the same stem (―strengthened
with all power,‖ 1:11; cf. 1:29; 2:11, 19), synonymous expressions (―praying and asking,‖
1:9; cf. 1:11, 22, 23, 26; 2:7; 3:8, 16; 4:12), series of dependent genitives (―the word of
truth, of the gospel,‖ 1:5; cf. 1:12, 13, 20, 24, 27; 2:2, 11, 12), examples of nouns attached
to phrases by the preposition ―in‖ (ejn: ―the grace of God in truth,‖ 1:6; cf. 1:8, 12, 29 etc)
and a loosely joined infinitive construction (―to walk worthily of the Lord,‖ 1:10; cf. 1:22,
25; 4:3, 6). Although similar usages can be cited from the chief Pauline letters they do not
appear as frequently (cf. Schweizer, 22). Furthermore, it has been argued by Lohse (89) and
others that Colossians is characterized by a liturgical hymnic style with its long sentences,
made up of relative clauses, inserted causal phrases, participial phrases and further notes,
some of which may be compared with material from the Qumran texts.
    These stylistic pecularities, however, have been interpreted differently. Percy
(Probleme, 43) considers that these features when compared with the rest of the Pauline
letters have their ―basis entirely in the peculiarity of the letter‘s content. This content, for its
part, is clearly connected with the peculiarity of the situation which necessitated the letter‖
(cited by Lohse, 90; cf. Kümmel‘s conclusion, Introduction, 342: ―On the basis of language
and style … there is no reason to doubt the Pauline authorship of the letter‖). Lohse (91) for
his part, while concluding (on the grounds of theology) that ―the author was a theologian
decisively influenced by Paul‖ nevertheless admits that ―on the basis of the observations
made about the language and style of the letter, no final decision can yet be reached on the
question of Pauline or non-Pauline authorship of the letter.‖ Several recent continental
scholars have been more negative in their judgment. So Schweizer (23, with special
reference to Bujard‘s researches, Untersuchungen) concludes that a large number of
carefully evaluated observations gives a uniform picture and depicts an author who, for all
his dependence on Paul in vocabulary and thought, nevertheless argues differently from
him. ―The letter cannot have been written or dictated by Paul.‖ Such a judgment in our
view appears to be unduly negative and presupposes an almost infallible understanding of
what Paul could or could not have done. It also does not really explain the close similarities
between Colossians and the generally accepted Pauline letters, a point which Ollrog
(Paulus, 220, 237) is painfully aware of but does not satisfactorily answer with his own
thesis of authorship by one close to Paul, i.e. Timothy.



B. THE TEACHING OF THE EPISTLE

    For some scholars such as Lohse the supposed theological differences between
Colossians and the generally accepted Pauline letters are decisive against the apostolic
authorship of Colossians, even if the grounds of language and style were not. Earlier
Mayerhoff believed that Colossians was full of non-Pauline ideas. F. C. Baur and the
Tübingen school agreed with this judgment and cast further doubt on the apostolic
authorship because this letter did not reflect the conflict between Jewish Christianity and
Gentile Christianity which was the hallmark of the apostolic age. Further, it was argued that
the letter‘s Christology belonged to a later period of church history when classical Gnostic
influences had begun to exert themselves (on Baur‘s position see W. G. Kümmel, The New
Testament. The History of the Investigation of its Problems. Tr S. McLean Gilmour and H.
C. Kee (London: SCM, 1972) 135–37 American edition [Nashville, TN: Abingdon, 1972],
cited by Martin, NCB, 33). It has already been shown that one need not resort to supposed
full-blown Gnostic influences of the second century as a reconstructed background to the
heresy and its letter. If the Jewish background of an ascetic mystical kind is the most likely
of the competing possibilities (see above xxxvi–xxxviii) then there is no need to look
beyond the apostolic age and certainly Pauline authorship is not ruled out on this account.
More significant are the objections to Paul‘s authorship on the grounds that major
differences exist between Colossians and the theology of the main Pauline epistles. These
differences, it is asserted, are not limited to the passages that argue against the
―philosophy,‖ but also turn up in sections that are free of polemic. They may be examined
under the following headings:



1. CHRISTOLOGY
Lohse claims (178, 179) that Colossians develops its Christology on the basis of the
Christ-hymn of chapter 1:15–20, and goes beyond the recognized Pauline statements of 1
Corinthians 8:6 and Romans 8:31–39 in its teaching that in Christ the entire fullness of
deity dwells ―bodily‖ (swmatikw`", 2:9) and that he is the ―head of every principality and
power‖ (2:10). Certainly the hymnic passage (1:15–20) is central to the letter: the long
prayer report of chapter 1:9–14 leads up to this paragraph in praise of Christ, while
subsequent references in the epistle either echo some of its statements or are a spelling out
of their implications. We judge that chapter 2:10 may be explained along these latter lines
(there is no implication that ―every principality and power‖ is a member of Christ‘s body;
see the exegesis) while chapter 2:9 applies the words of the hymn (1:19) to the context of
the Colossian heresy, making plain by the addition of the words ―bodily‖ (swmatikw`") the
manner the entire fullness of deity dwells in Christ, i.e. in bodily form, by becoming
incarnate (see on 2:9). The emphatic cosmic dimension of Christ‘s rule is a fuller and more
systematic exposition of the theme of Christ‘s universal lordship, already made plain in
earlier Pauline letters (cf. 1 Cor 8:6; 1:24; 2:6–10) and now spelled out in relation to and as
a correction of the false teaching at Colossae. There is no need to postulate an author other
than Paul as the source of such ideas.



2. ECCLESIOLOGY
The ecclesiology of Colossians is intimately connected with its Christology. This is
nowhere more apparent than in the statement that Christ is the ―head of the body‖ (kefalh;
tou` swvmato"), that is, ―the church‖ (th`" ejkklhsiva", 1:18). In the relevant exegetical
section we have contended that sw`ma (―body‖) here did not originally refer to the cosmos
and thus there is no need to look for Stoic antecedents as the source of the writer‘s ideas
(see 48–50). In 1 Corinthians 12:12–27 and Romans 12:4, 5 Paul employs the body
terminology and its constituent parts to refer to the mutual relations and obligations of
Christians. In these earlier references the ―head‖ (kealhv) of the body had no special
position or honor; it was counted as an ordinary member (cf. 1 Cor 12:21). In Colossians
(and Ephesians) there is an advance in the line of thought, from the language of simile (as
in 1 Cor and Rom) to that of a real and interpersonal involvement. This advance may well
have been stimulated by Paul‘s reflection on the issues involved, in the Colossian heresy
(for details see on 1:18).
    The term ejkklhsiva (―church‖) at chapter 1:18 is usually taken to refer to the people of
God all over the world, the universal or world-wide church, where Christ here and now
exercises his cosmic lordship (see for example E. Lohse, ―Christusherrschaft und Kirche im
Kolosserbrief,‖ NTS 11 [1964–65] 203–216, especially 204–207). However, we have
suggested below (57–61) against the majority opinion, that it is best to understand this as a
reference to a heavenly assembly around the risen and exalted Christ (cf. Col 3:1–4; Eph
2:6). That heavenly gathering with Christ at its center is manifested here and now on earth.
Hence the same word ejkklhsiva (―church‖) can be used of the local congregation at
Colossae or even of a small house community (4:15, 16). The congregation in heaven finds
its manifestation and becomes visible as the domain of Christ‘s rule where the saints and
faithful brothers in Christ gather (1:2).



3. ESCHATOLOGY
     In the current discussion about the eschatology of Colossians several different
arguments are used against an acceptance of the apostolic authorship of the letter. Since
these have been treated at length in the relevant exegetical sections we shall simply
summarize the salient points here.
     Bornkamm (see on 1:5 and 3:4) alleged that ejlpiv" meaning the ―object of hope‖ in
chapter 1:5 was unusual in Paul (―hope‖ was normally regarded as signifying the subjective
experience of the Christian like ―faith‖ and ―love‖). Further, he detected in Colossians 1:26,
27 not hope in the sense of historical eschatology but a ―gnostic spherical thought.‖
However in neither chapters 1:26, 27 nor 3:4 are there spherical conceptions. Rather, there
is evidence of a genuine eschatological tension. (It is perhaps not without significance that
Bornkamm made no reference to Rom 8:24, 25—a passage in one of the main
letters—where the connotation ―object of hope‖ is certainly present [cf. Gal 5:5]; see the
criticisms of Kümmel, Introduction, 344, and Martin, NCB, 34, 35.)
It is also alleged that eschatology in Colossians has receded into the background. Chapter
3:4 is said to contain the only explicit futuristic reference, and even here the
―hidden-revealed‖ motif is without parallel in the earlier Pauline letters. Spatial concepts
are thought to dominate at chapters 1:26, 27; 3:1–4; while none of the typically Pauline
eschatological ideas—parousia, resurrection of the dead, judgment of the world—is
encountered in Colossians. Further, it is pointed out that in this letter not only have
believers died with Christ and been buried with him in baptism (2:11, 12), but also (unlike
the genuine Pauline epistles), they are said to have been raised with him (2:12); God has
made them alive together with Christ (2:13), raising them with him from the dead (3:1).
The resurrection to new life has already occurred, so that the future event is no longer
called the resurrection of the dead but the revelation of life in which the Christians already
participate and which is still hidden with Christ in God (3:3, 4). The ethical ―imperative‖ in
Colossians as elsewhere in Paul is based on the ―indicative‖; however it is argued that in
Colossians, but nowhere in the genuine epistles of Paul, the resurrection of Christians in the
past or present is regarded as the basis of that imperative.
     A more detailed examination of these contentions has been made at 168, 169). Suffice it
to say at this point that there is an emphasis on realized eschatology in Colossians, called
forth by the particular circumstances of the letter. In terms of the ―already-not yet‖ tension
the accent falls upon the former. But this is not to suggest that the ―not yet‖ side of Paul‘s
tension is absent. There is future eschatology at chapters 3:4, 6, 24 and, in our estimation, at
1:22, 28; cf. 4:11 (note the relevant exegetical sections). The ―hidden-revealed‖ theme is a
significant apocalyptic feature, while spatial concepts are used in the service of
eschatology. The antithesis between eschatological and transcendent perspectives is a false
one as both are found together in the undisputed Paulines and at Colossians 3:1–4. The
apocalyptic notion of the resurrection from the dead is found at chapter 1:18 (see on this
passage and 3:4) and in the undisputed Paulines the ideas of the resurrection from the dead
and eschatological life are interchangeable (cf. Rom 4:17; 5:17, 18, 21; 8:11 etc; see further
on chapter 2:12). There is an eschatological motivation in Colossians; it may not be
dominant but it is present nevertheless (the exhortation, ―put to death, therefore, …‖ 3:5, is
based on verses 1–4, the last of which has an eschatological emphasis). At the same time
there are other grounds for exhortation in the generally accepted Pauline letters. In sum, the
arguments against the Pauline authorship of Colossians based on a change in eschatology
are inadequate. The differences of emphasis can be satisfactorily explained by the particular
circumstances of the letter. There is no need to resort to a non-Pauline or post-Pauline
authorship.



4. TRADITION
    The alleged differences between the theology of Colossians and that of the major
Pauline letters in the above-mentioned areas of Christology, ecclesiology and
eschatology—differences which are thought to pervade the nonpolemical as well as the
polemical parts of the letter—are ascribed to the emergence of a ―Pauline school tradition‖
which was based probably in Ephesus. E. Käsemann (―A Primitive Christian Baptismal
Liturgy,‖ Essays on New Testament Themes. Tr by W. J. Montague [London: SCM, 1964]
166, 167 American edition [SBT 41; Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1964]) focuses his attention
on two further features of this tradition. First, the baptismal homologia or confession of
faith. He maintains that the post-Pauline author of the epistle has taken over a pre-Christian
hymn (1:15–20) and used it for his purposes by setting it within the framework of a
Christian confession of faith, by surrounding it with baptismal motifs (1:13, 14, which he
had, in fact, found already connected with the hymnic piece), and a pastoral admonition to
remain true to the faith (1:21–23). The intention of the author‘s Christian use of the hymn
was to combat heresy by a confession of faith shared by this community of the subapostolic
age. Whatever else one may say about the overall approach, Käsemann‘s contentions that
the hymn was originally a pre-Christian Gnostic text taken over in Christian usage in a
baptismal liturgical reinterpretation have been rejected by contemporary New Testament
scholarship, and with good reason (for details see below 37, 38, cf. 25 and note the critique
of the view integral to Käsemann‘s argument that vv 12–14 were known in a prebaptismal
context and served as an ―introit‖ to the hymn).
The second feature of this post-Pauline tradition, according to Käsemann, is the adherence
of the community ―to the apostolic office as guardian of the truth. The apostolate expounds
the truth of the Gospel, as the confession of faith fixes it‖ (Essays, 166, 167). It is not Paul
who relates the confession and apostolate in this way; rather, it ―is the voice of the
subapostolic age.‖
    Closely related to this presentation is the view of Marxsen (Introduction, 177–86) who
argues that within the list of greetings in Colossians Epaphras‘ name is especially
emphasized. One of the chief reasons for this document, which is ―a kind of pastoral letter‖
(180), was to give an apostolic authorization to Epaphras whose teaching represents the
mind of Paul. Now that the apostle is no longer alive Epaphras stands in an apostolic
succession. The letter bears the marks of the ―early catholicism‖ of the subapostolic age,
according to Marxsen (note the remarks on 4:13). For Lohse (68) ―Colossians certifies the
gospel as the correct teaching by connecting it with the apostolic office.‖
However, serious questions have been raised about the grounds for such far-reaching
reconstructions, and scholars such as Schweizer and Ollrog, who do not accept the direct
Pauline authorship of Colossians, have made several pertinent criticisms. Both argue that of
all the so-called deutero-Pauline letters Colossians stands most closely to Pauline theology.
It is clearly an occasional letter written to a concrete church situation (cf. especially
Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief). Colossians stands in a close relationship to the letter to
Philemon. In both Paul is in prison (Col 4:3, 10, 18; Philem 1, 9, 10, 13, 23). The names of
Paul and Timothy stand at the head of each letter (Col 1:1; Philem 1). Eight of the nine
names mentioned in Philemon appear in Colossians. Clearly they are Paul‘s co-workers,
and it just will not do with Lohse (177) to assert that the messages and greetings as well as
particular details about fellow-workers of the apostle are used by the author of Colossians
―to prove that his writing is an apostolic message‖ (Lohse adds: ―In using Philemon‘s list of
greetings and making it more vivid, he ensures that his letter will gain a hearing as a
message from Paul‖; Ollrog, Paulus, 238, 239, is critical of Lohse‘s methodology, claiming
that the latter has not properly analyzed the epistolary situation of Colossians; rather, he has
first decided that the theology reflected in the letter is post-Pauline, and then turned to the
historical details such as the list of greetings to ―confirm‖ his prior judgment that the
Pauline school made literary use of Philemon). Both Schweizer (23–27) and Ollrog
(Paulus, 241; cf. Lähnemann‘s arguments, Kolosserbrief, 181, 182) claim, with reference to
the above-mentioned issue of tradition, that Colossians is not post-Pauline.
     Finally the matter must be settled on the exegesis of chapters 1:7; 4:7–13 (see the
relevant exegetical sections) and the important statement about Paul‘s commission to
preach the gospel in chapters 1:23–2:5. The function of the latter passage is to spell out the
content and purpose of Paul‘s ministry, a commission given to him in accordance with the
gospel-plan of God to make known God‘s mystery among the Gentiles, and especially
among the Colossians. He is a minister (diavkono") of the gospel (1:23), just as are
Epaphras (1:7; cf. 4:12, 13) and Tychicus (4:7). Against Lohse (68) it must be maintained
that the gospel is not certified as correct teaching by its connection with the apostolic
office. Quite the reverse. It is the gospel that gives the validity to Paul‘s commission: he is
to serve that gospel and to proclaim it fully and effectively throughout the world (1:25, 26).
His service of the gospel finds expression in suffering (1:24) and imprisonment, and while
this is generally on behalf of Gentiles, to whom the mystery is now made known, it has
particular reference to the Colossians (note the parallelism of 1:24–29 with 2:1–5). This
paragraph is not written to legitimize the gospel through the apostolic office of Paul, and
then to assert (1:7; 4:7–13) the legitimation of Epaphras because of his relationship to Paul.
Paul serves the gospel; so does Epaphras, and the apostle goes out of his way to show the
equality of himself and his co-workers (sunergoiv) as ministers (diavkonoi) of that word.
There is no attempt in these three passages (either singly or jointly) to give an apostolic
authorization to Epaphras because he stands in an apostolic succession and his teaching
represents the mind of Paul. There is no suggestion of ongoing authority or apostolic
succession bound up with any single person.
In our estimation the so-called differences between Colossians and the generally accepted
Pauline letters do not constitute sufficient grounds for rejecting the apostolic authorship of
this epistle. Differences of emphasis there are, but these are best interpreted as being called
forth by the circumstances at Colossae. It is not without significance that some of the most
recent continental New Testament scholarship has recognized that the historical situation of
Colossians, together with the theological answers provided for these difficult pastoral
circumstances, stands very close to that of Paul (so Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 23–28,
177–83, Schweizer, 23–27, and Ollrog, Paulus, 219–31, 236–42). Rejecting a post-Pauline
situation, the latter two scholars have suggested the differences between Colossians and the
other epistles of Paul may be due to Timothy‘s authorship, or at least his active hand in the
composition of the letter under Paul‘s authority. While it may not be necessary to resort to
this suggestion, at this stage of NT research further understanding is needed as to what part
Paul may have allowed his colleagues to play in the production of his letters.



THE PLACE OF PAUL‘S IMPRISONMENT


A. INTRODUCTION
Four NT letters have been called the captivity Epistles: Colossians, Philemon, Ephesians
and Philippians. As far as personal names are concerned Philemon, Colossians and
Ephesians form a group by themselves. Colossians 4:7, 8 and Ephesians 6:21, 22 speak of
Tychicus as a bearer of the two letters, and Dibelius-Greeven, (99; cf. Martin, NCB, 23)
commenting on the latter passage indicates there is ―the most extensive verbal contact‖
between the two epistles at this point. Tychicus had Onesimus as his companion on the
journey to the Lycus valley, the same Onesimus mentioned in the note to Philemon who is
returning, evidently at the same time (Phlm 12). Greetings are sent from practically the
same people (Phlm 23; Col 1:7, 4:12–19) so that clearly Philemon and Colossians stand
together (see above). The place of Archippus confirms this last point. He is addressed in
Colossians 4:17 and encouraged to fulfill the ministry he has received in the Lord, while in
the letter to Philemon he appears to be a member of Philemon‘s household (v 2).
    On the other hand, Philippians stands somewhat apart. Except for Timothy all the rest
of the personal names are different (the Epaphroditus of Phil 2:25; 4:18 is not to be
identified with Epaphras), as are the travel plans. Further, Paul‘s future, as reflected in
Philippians, was full of uncertainty. His life was in the balance (1:20–24); he has no way of
predicting the outcome of his trial, though on pastoral (1:24–26) and theological grounds
(2:24) he hopes for his release. The possibility of being martyred for Christ was all too real
(1:21; 2:17).
    The other three prison epistles do not give any hint of this apprehensiveness about the
future. The atmosphere of Colossians, by contrast, is calm. If the two letters come from the
same imprisonment (and there is considerable difference of opinion over this) then we must
assume that Paul‘s situation worsened considerably in the interval between the two letters.
Since early times attempts have been made to answer the question: where was Paul when
the letter to the Colossians was written? The letter itself states that Paul was in bonds for
the sake of the mystery of Christ (4:3), that Aristarchus, his fellow-prisoner, was with him
(4:10), and that the congregation are asked to remember his imprisonment in prayer (4:18).
Nothing is mentioned explicitly, however, as to where Paul was captive.
B. A ROMAN IMPRISONMENT

     Until fairly recent times there was little doubt that Paul was in Rome when he wrote
this letter. The ―subscript‖ which was added at a later date asserts: ―written from Rome by
Tychicus and Onesimus‖ (K L etc). Eusebius (History, 2.22.1) records that Paul was brought
to Rome and that ―Aristarchus was with him; whom also somewhere in his epistles he
suitably calls a fellow-prisoner,‖ a reference presumably to Colossians 4:10. This mention
of Aristarchus agrees with the statement in Acts 27:2 from which it seems that he
accompanied Paul all the way to Rome (see on Col 4:10).
     Other factors which point to a Roman imprisonment when Paul wrote Colossians are:
     (i) Paul‘s confinement in Rome is described by Eusebius as ―without restraint‖
(borrowed from Acts 28:30) which suggests a measure of freedom that could account for
the presence of co-workers and friends (4:7–17) and, if necessary, a scribe to engage in
letter-writing for him.
     (ii) The list of names which links Colossians with Philemon brings to our attention the
case of Onesimus. Assuming he actually ran away and sought asylum in Paul‘s presence
(see 266, 267), it is argued that fearful of being caught and punished he would seek
anonymity in the imperial capital where he could safely disappear from public notice.
(iii) No other imprisonment in Acts seems a real alternative. Paul was in jail at Philippi
(Acts 16:23–40) for one night only, and although he was held for two years at Caesarea
(Acts 24:27) there are difficulties in assuming a Caesarean imprisonment when Paul might
have written Colossians, as we have noted below. The suggestion of Rome is based on a
known imprisonment of such a character as to allow the events reflected in Colossians to
happen (note the mild restrictions mentioned in Acts 28:16, 30). Travel between Rome and
the east was frequent and not so formidable a task as to make the communications implied
in the prison epistles impossible (Moule, 24). Paul‘s joy over the triumph of the gospel
throughout the whole world fits well in Rome (1:6, 23).
     (iv) Bruce (Paul, 411, 412) considers a later imprisonment such as at Rome (rather than
at Caesarea) to be more likely than an early imprisonment in Ephesus (dated c . A.D. 54–57).
In default of more explicit evidence he claims that the progression in Pauline thought,
notably in the conception of the church as the body of Christ, is an important criterion for
the dating of Colossians. This letter ―marks a more advanced stage in Paul‘s thinking on the
subject than do 1 Corinthians and Romans.‖ He adds that ―it is difficult to date it [i.e.
Colossians] during his Ephesian ministry, about the same time as 1 Corinthians and earlier
than Romans. It follows that an Ephesian imprisonment is out of the question as the setting
of Colossians‖ (411, 412). Rome is then preferred to Caesarea ―on all counts‖ (Bruce, Paul,
411, is not unmindful of the danger of arguing in a circle, determining the development of
Paul‘s thought from the order of his epistles, and then determining the order of his epistles
from the development of his thought; Martin, NCB, 29, contends that arguments from the
development of Paul‘s theological themes are not conclusive).
     Nevertheless doubts have been raised over a Roman captivity as being the place from
which the letter was sent (cf. Martin, NCB, 25, 26):
     (i) The great distance between Colossae and Rome (some 1,200 miles) is a factor to be
taken into account: Epaphras and Onesimus have already come to Paul, Tychicus and
Onesimus are to return. Paul refers to these journeys, across land and sea, in a rather casual
way.
     (ii) Onesimus‘ escape to Rome in order to bury himself in the imperial city would have
involved great risks and the possibility of capture on the long journey from Colossae.
However, it must be remembered that other runaway slaves had traveled long distances
with similar dangers in order to reach Rome.
    (iii) Several scholars have noted that if Paul‘s hopes for a release from prison are
granted he expects to visit Colossae (Phlm 22). This would involve a revision of an earlier
intention to visit Spain (Rom 15:28) based on the conviction that his missionary and
pastoral activities had been completed in the Eastern Mediterranean (Rom 15:23, 24). Now
while Paul was known to change his plans, and was charged with inconsistency as a result
(2 Cor 1:15–24), this change would seem to imply a shift in missionary strategy. (Also
implied is the acceptance of the tradition deriving from Eusebius [History, 2.22, 2, 3] that
Paul was released after the two years of detention in Rome, and Martin [NCB, 26] following
others including G. Ogg, The Chronology of the Life of Paul [London: Epworth, 1968]
178–93 American edition, The Odyssey of Paul [Old Tappan, NJ: Revell] claims this is not
certain.)
(iv) Further, if Paul is hoping for an early release (which seems to be implied in Philem 22),
then his request, ―prepare a guest room for me,‖ is an unusual one given that he is about to
undertake a 1,200-mile journey by sea and land before reaching Philemon‘s home.



C. A CAESAREAN IMPRISONMENT

    The case for a Caesarean imprisonment has been advocated by scholars in recent times
as the place where Colossians was composed (so Dibelius Greeven, 52, Lohmeyer, 14, 15,
Reicke, History, 277–82; and J. J. Gunther, Paul: Messenger and Exile. A Study in the
Chronology of His Life and Letters [Valley Forge: Judson, 1972] 98–112; cf. Kümmel,
Introductions, 346–48). It is argued that Aristarchus‘ sharing of Paul‘s imprisonment (Col
4:10) can be harmonized with Acts 20:4; 24:23, while Tychicus who, according to Acts
20:4, had traveled with Paul to Jerusalem, might well have gone on with him to Caesarea.
Onesimus is more likely to have wandered to Caesarea than to Rome, and it is possible he
might have sought Paul‘s protection in the company of several Hellenistic Christians who
were with Paul at Caesarea. Paul‘s request of Philemon for accommodation in Colossae
(Phlm 22) is possible from Caesarea if he has not yet counted on an appeal to the emperor,
or if as Reicke suggests he intended to visit Colossae on his way as a prisoner to Rome.
One serious question mark against the suggestion of a Caesarean imprisonment is that such
a small city as Caesarea could hardly have been the home of active missionary work
requiring such a large staff of Paul‘s co-workers of Gentile origin. It does not seem that this
small harbor city was the center of vigorous propaganda as suggested in Colossians 4:3, 4
where Paul has freedom to speak. Nor is there any suggestion in Acts that Paul
contemplated an early release once he had appealed to Caesar and his case was remitted to
Rome.



D. AN EPHESIAN IMPRISONMENT

   In addition to Rome Ephesus was also named as the city in which Paul was in prison
when he wrote to the community at Colossae. So the Marcionite prologue to the letter
reads: ―The apostle already in fetters writes to them from Ephesus.‖ There is no explicit
mention either in the Pauline epistles or in the Acts of the Apostles of an Ephesian
imprisonment. However, advocates of this theory (which include Deissmann, Michaelis,
and note especially Duncan, Ministry; cf. Martin, NCB, 26–32, and Ollrog, Paulus, 59 etc)
point out that evidence of imprisonments other than those recorded in Acts appears in 2
Corinthians 11:23 (while Clement of Rome, A.D. 96, mentions seven, ad Cor 5.6). In
addition, several passages in the Corinthian letters which might have come out of a period
of Paul‘s conflict in Ephesus tell us something of his deep troubles (1 Cor 4:9–13; 2 Cor
4:8–12; 6:4, 5; 11:23–25). First Corinthians 15:32 (―I fought with wild beasts,‖
ejqhriomavchsa), even if it is not to be taken literally, speaks of Paul enduring some lift or
death struggle at Ephesus. It has been conjectured that Paul may have been delivered
because of his Roman citizenship. Second Corinthians 1:8 speaks of a severe trial (qli`yi")
in Asia, while the occasion on which Priscilla and Aquila risked their lives for Paul‘s sake
(Rom 16:3, 4) is thought to have been at Ephesus.
If the possibility of such a captivity is allowed, then it is argued we can place Colossians
more satisfactorily in this period of Paul‘s life, that is, during his extended stay at or near
Ephesus, from the autumn of A.D. 54 to the late summer of A.D. 57 (cf. Ogg, Chronology,
134–38, who is followed by Martin, NCB, 27; others contend A.D. 52–55 are more likely
dates). Duncan (Ministry, 111–15) fixes the occasion more precisely, attributing the
imprisonment of Paul to a direct consequence of the Demetrius riot (Acts 19:23–41). This
disturbance is dated in the late spring of A.D. 57, linking it with the festival in honor of the
goddess Artemis during that year.
    The arguments, then, used in favor of an Ephesian imprisonment as the setting of
Colossians may be summarized as follows:
    (i) The fact that Ephesus and Colossae were no more than one hundred miles apart is
thought to explain more easily the movements described in the letter between the place of
Paul‘s imprisonment and Colossae. Onesimus, it is claimed, is just as likely to have sought
refuge in a metropolis, Ephesus, as in distant Rome (C. H. Dodd, New Testament Studies
[Manchester: University, 1953] 95, argued, however, it was more likely that a fugitive
slave, with his pockets lined at his master‘s expense, would make for Rome because it was
distant rather than Ephesus because it was near).
    (ii) If Paul was at Ephesus when he wrote Colossians and Philemon, then his request for
a lodging at Colossae (Phlm 22) immediately after his release becomes more reasonable.
    (iii) It is believed that the individuals mentioned in the two letters as relating to Paul in
his confinement are more satisfactorily accounted for on this theory (cf. C. R. Bowen, ―Are
Paul‘s prison letters from Ephesus?‖ AJT 24 [1920] 112–35, 277–87; Duncan, Ministry,
156, and others favoring the Ephesian hypothesis; note Kümmel, Introduction, 347, against
Lohse, 166).
    (iv) Bowen (―The Original Form of Paul‘s Letter to the Colossians,‖ JBL 43 [1924]
177–206) suggested Colossae had only recently been evangelized when Paul wrote to the
church there. If this is correct then an extra reason is given for locating the letter during the
period between Acts 19:10 and Paul‘s subsequent detention in or around Ephesus (Bowen‘s
claim, however, is difficult to substantiate; see Guthrie, Introduction, 172).
    Martin‘s conclusion (NCB, 30) is that ―this apostolic letter belongs to that tumultuous
period of Paul‘s life, represented in Acts 19–20, when for a brief space his missionary
labours were interrupted by an enforced spell as a détenu near Ephesus.‖
To sum up. Of the three options, Ephesus and Rome have greater claims to being the place
where Paul wrote Colossians and Philemon than Caesarea. The Ephesian hypothesis has
many strong points in its favor and cannot be entirely ruled out since the evidence for Rome
is not decisive. Certainly the latter hypothesis is built on a known imprisonment of such a
character as to allow the events reflected in Colossians and Philemon to happen. The
presence of Luke with Paul is supported by Acts, whereas the Ephesian ministry of the
apostle does not occur in a ―we‖ section and there is reasonable doubt whether Luke was
with Paul during this period. Aristarchus was arrested in Ephesus (cf. Acts 19:29; Duncan,
Ministry, 148–53, considers this points to an Ephesian imprisonment of Paul as the context
of the letter, but this passage does not specifically mention an official arrest, only his
seizure by mob violence), and it would seem from Acts 27:2 that he accompanied Paul to
Rome (see on Col 4:10) and may well have shared to some extent his privations.
Arguments based on development of thought must be used with caution, but there does
seem to be some force to the contention that the theological expressions of Colossians
belong to a later than an earlier period, and this would point in the direction of a Roman
captivity. On balance we prefer this alternative.
     If the Roman hypothesis is accepted then the most likely placing is fairly early in Paul‘s
(first) Roman imprisonment, i.e. c. A.D. 60–61; those advocating the Ephesian alternative
place it around A.D. 54–57, or on the earlier dating A.D. 52–55.



ANALYSIS OF COLOSSIANS

Chapter
1:1, 2
INTRODUCTORY GREETING

1:3–8
THANKSGIVING: FAITH-LOVE-HOPE AND THE GOSPEL

1:9–14
AN INTERCESSION FOR KNOWLEDGE AND GODLY CONDUCT

1:15–20
CHRIST THE LORD IN CREATION AND REDEMPTION

1:21–23
RECONCILIATION ACCOMPLISHED AND APPLIED

1:24–2:5
PAUL‘S MISSION AND PASTORAL CONCERN

2:6–15
THE ANTIDOTE TO ERROR: CHRIST IN ALL HIS FULLNESS
2:16–23
FREEDOM FROM LEGALISM

3:1–4
SEEK THE THINGS ABOVE

3:5–11
PUT AWAY THE SINS OF THE PAST

3:12–17
PUT ON THE GRACES OF CHRIST

3:18–4:1
BEHAVIOR IN THE CHRISTIAN HOUSEHOLD

4:2–6
FINAL ADMONITIONS: PERSISTENCE IN PRAYER AND RIGHT BEHAVIOR TOWARD OUTSIDERS

4:7–18
PERSONAL GREETINGS AND INS




Introductory Greeting (1:1, 2)
Bibliography
Berger, K. ―Apostelbrief und apostolische Rede/Zum Formular frühchristlicher Briefe.‖ ZNW 65
(1974) 190–231. Deissmann, A. Bible Studies. Tr A. Grieve. Edinburgh: Clark, 1901. Doty, W. G.
Letters in Primitive Christianity. Guides to Biblical Scholarship, NT Series. Philadelphia: Fortress,
1973. Friedrich, G. ―Lohmeyers These über ‗Das paulinische Briefpräskript‘ kritisch beleuchtet.‖
ZNW 46 (1955) 272–74 and TLZ 81 (1956) 343–46. Harder. G. Paulus und dos Gebet. NTF 1S, 10.
Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1936. Jewett, R. ―The Form and Function of the Homiletic Benediction.‖
ATR 51 (1969) 18–34. Lohmeyer, E. ―Probleme paulinischer Theologie. I. Briefliche
Grussüberschriften.‖ ZNW 26 (1927) 158–73. Mullins, T. Y. ―Benediction as a NT Form.‖ AUSS 15
(1977) 59–64. Roller, O. Das Formular der paulinischen Briefe. Ein Beitrag zur Lehre vom antiken
Briefe. BWANT 4S, 6. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1933. Schenk, W. Der Segen in Neuen Testament.
Eine begriffsanalytische Studie. ThA 25. Berlin: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, 1967. Wiles, G. P.
Paul‘s Intercessory Prayers: The Significance of the Intercessory Prayer Passages in the Letters of
St Paul. SNTSMS 24. Cambridge: University Press, 1974.

Translation
1
  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our co-worker, 2To the
saints and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace and peace to you from God our
Father.
Form/Structure/Setting
    Paul begins his letter to the Colossians in the usual way, mentioning author, recipients
and a greeting. The Pauline prescript follows the oriental and Jewish model characterized
by its twofold form: first, the name of the sender and that of the addressee(s); second, the
greeting with its form of direct address: ―peace be with you!‖ An example of this oriental
model with its twofold structure, including a greeting in the form of a direct address, is the
edict of Nebuchadnezzar which opens with the words ―King Nebuchadnezzar to all
peoples, nations and languages that dwell in all the earth: peace be multiplied to you!
([eijrhvnh uJmi`n plhqunqeivh]‖ Dan 3:98 [4:1]; cf. Apoc Bar 78:2).
However consistent the structures of the address and greeting may be—and both verses 1
and 2 correspond to the outline used in all the Pauline letters—the creative variations in the
opening formulae regarding authorship, where Paul adapts his description of himself and
his credentials to the circumstances of each particular letter, the various phrases he employs
to describe his Christian readers, and the theological content poured into the greetings all
indicate that his prescripts are far from being stereotyped introductions to his epistles.

Comment
     1. Pau`lo". Paul introduces himself to a Christian congregation that was not known to
him personally (2:1) and which was founded through one of his
colleagues—Epaphras—rather than by himself (1:4; 7–9). These points help to account for
the distinctive features in the introductory greeting.
     At the head of the letter is the name ―Paul,‖ used by the apostle in the
Hellenistic-Roman world in place of the Jewish ―Saul.‖ Jews in the Greek-speaking areas
took names which closely approximated to the sound of their Hebrew and Aramaic names,
e.g. Silas:Silvanus; Jesus:Jason (cf. Deissmann, Bible Studies, 314, 315, and Lohse, 6).
     ajpovstolo" Criston` jIhsou` dia; qelhvmato" qeou`. As in 2 Corinthians 1:1 Paul
reserves the designation ―apostle‖ for himself. Neither Timothy nor Epaphras who first
brought the gospel to Colossae, is accorded this title. Paul alone was the Colossians‘
apostle, even though he had not previously visited them in person, for he had been
independently and directly commissioned by the risen Lord. Timothy and Epaphras along
with other loved and honored ―fellow-servants‖ were Paul‘s lieutenants, commissioned to
help in the task of proclaiming the gospel and planting churches. (At 1 Thess 2:6, 7, when
Paul links Timothy and Silvanus with himself as ―apostles of Christ,‖ he appears to be
using the term in a wider sense.)
     Paul describes himself as an ―apostle of Christ Jesus‖ in this introduction, not because
there had been attacks made on his apostleship in Colossae, as there had been at Galatia and
Corinth (cf. Gal 1:1, 10–12; 1 Cor 9:1–3; 2 Cor 10–13), but since he wished to establish his
credentials at the outset. He will expose and refute the false teaching (cf. 2:4, 8) that had
intruded into the life of the congregation, and underscore the rightness of Epaphras‘
instruction, given to this infant Christian community. So by the addition of this title Paul
draws attention to the official character of his writing to the community. (For
bibliographical information on apostleship see F. Hahn, ―Der Apostolat im Urchristentum.
Seine Eigenart und seine Voraussetzungen,‖ KD 20 [1974] 54–77, J. A. Kirk, ―Apostleship
since Rengstorf: Towards a Synthesis,‖ NTS 21 [1974–75] 249–64, and F. Agnew, ―On the
Origin of the Term Apostolos,‖ CBQ 38 [1976] 49–53.)
     There is no suggestion of high-handedness on Paul‘s part when he styles himself an
―apostle‖; as such he belongs to Christ Jesus (Cristou` jIhsou`) and has been called to this
ministry ―through the will of God‖ (dia; qelhvmato" qeou`), an expression that is
tantamount to a declaration of God‘s unmerited grace, as well as a renunciation of personal
worth (at 1:9 and 4:12 the ―will of God‖ refers to that will which is to be fulfilled in the life
of the Christian, whereas here it is the will of God which elects and which made Paul an
apostle, cf. 2 Cor 1:1; Eph 1:1; 2 Tim 1:1). This calling in accordance with the divine
purpose had special reference to his ministry to Gentile congregations (cf. Eph 3:1–13). As
apostle he had authority to teach (cf. 1 Tim 2:7) and to deal pastorally with congregations in
his care (2 Cor 13:10). As the letter unfolds we note Paul exercises his ministry in both
teaching and pastoral care.
     kai; Timovqeo" oJ ajdelfov". Paul associates Timothy with himself in the salutation (cf.
the companion epistle, Philem 1 and contrast Eph 1:1) as he does in 2 Corinthians 1:1 and
Philippians 1:1, and in the beginnings of the Thessalonian letters he names him along with
Silvanus (1 Thess 1:1; 2 Thess 1:1). Those linked with Paul in his introductions are not
joint authors of the letters. Their names probably appear alongside Paul‘s so as to indicate
to the congregation that they too preach and teach the one true gospel (Lohse, 7).
     Timothy was in Paul‘s company for much of his Ephesian ministry (cf. Acts 19:22; 2
Cor 1:1, etc). Of all who were associated with the apostle‘s mission none held a more
honored place than Timothy (note the tributes Paul pays to him at 1 Thess 3:2; 1 Cor 4:17;
Phil 2:19–24, showing how much he valued his support). He is here described as a
―brother‖ (ajdelfov"; cf. 2 Cor 1:1; 1 Thess 3:2; Phlm 1), which in this context means not so
much ―fellow-Christian‖ (though Timothy was obviously this, and the term has this
meaning at v 2) as ―co-worker‖ or ―helper‖ (cf. E. E. Ellis, ―Paul and his Co-Workers.‖ NTS
17 [1970–71] 437–52, reprinted in Prophecy and Hermeneutic in Early Christianity. New
Testament Essays WUNT 18; Tübingen: Mohr, 1978) 3–22; ― ‗Spiritual‘ Gifts in the Pauline
Community.‖ NTS 20 [1974] 128–44, reprinted in Prophecy, 23–44). He is elsewhere called
a ―minister‖ (diavkono": 2 Cor 3:6 and 6:4 with reference to 1:1), ―helper‖ or
―fellow-worker‖ (sunergov": Rom 16:21; 1 Thess 3:2; cf. 1 Cor 16:10) and a ―good soldier
of Christ Jesus‖ (2 Tim 2:3). The mention of Timothy in the superscription is an indication
to the Colossians that Paul is not alone in his imprisonment. Martin (NCB, 44) makes the
further suggestion that the mention of Timothy alongside Paul would be a useful buttress to
his own teaching position and a denial that the letter was simply an expression of his own
ideas.
     2. toi`" ejn Kolossai`" aJgivoi" kai; pistoi`" ajdelfoi`" ejn Cristw`/. The recipients of
the letter are now described in theological terms: ―to the saints and faithful brothers in
Christ at Colossae.‖ The term ―church‖ (ejkklhsiva) does not appear, but too much weight
ought not to be placed on this since it is omitted from the prescripts of Romans, Philippians
and Ephesians and in each of these instances a{gioi occurs instead. Further, the two
expressions are not unrelated as 1 Corinthians 1:2 shows, for the words ―the church of God
(th`/ ejkklhsiva/ tou` qeou`) which is at Corinth‖ are in apposition to the following ―those
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints‖ (klhtoi`" aJgivoi"; cf. 2 Cor 1:1). Because the
article is missing before ―faithful brothers‖ (pistoi`" ajdelfoi`") it has been argued that
aJgivoi" should be connected with pistoi`" as an adjective and rendered ―holy and faithful
brothers‖ (so NIV; cf. Moule 45). However, a{gioi always appears as a noun in the
salutations of the letters and in our view this is how it is being employed here; it should
therefore be translated ―saints‖ or ―holy ones.‖
The antecedents of this expression are to be found in the OT. Israel was God‘s holy people
(Exod 19:6) chosen by him and appointed to his service. Having been brought into a
covenant relationship with him, Israel was to be a holy nation because he is holy (Lev
11:44; 19:2; etc). Christians are ―saints‖ because of the new relationship they have been
brought into by God through Jesus Christ. They are set apart for him and his service; as the
people of his own possession they are the called and elect community of the end-time: they
are ―God‘s chosen ones, holy (a{gioi) and beloved‖ (3:12) whose lives are to be
characterized by godly behavior.
    The saints in Colossae (see earlier) are also designated ―faithful brothers in Christ‖
(pistoi; ajdelfoi; ejn Cristw`/). While pistov" (―faithful‖) is used several times by Paul in
Colossians to draw attention to the absolute reliability of his co-workers (1:7; 4:7, 9), here
it has the sense of ―believing,‖ of being Christian (Bultmann, TDNT 6, 214; cf. Eph 1:1).
The Colossians have placed their wholehearted trust in Jesus as Son of God, Lord and
Savior. The expression ―in Christ,‖ however, does not point to him as the one in whom they
have believed so much as the one in whom they, as brothers, have been brought together
into a living fellowship (on the theme of incorporation in Christ see on 2:6–15).
    cavri" uJmi`n kai; eijrhvnh ajpo; qeou` patro;" hJmw`n. The opening greetings of Paul‘s
letters (sometimes called benedictions or blessings) are stylized, remaining basically
unchanged in wording throughout (cf. Wiles, Prayers, 108–114, and Mullins, AUSS 15
[1977] 59–64; cf. Roller, Formular, table 3). They have therefore been thought by some to
be conventional adaptations from general epistolary usage or borrowed from some early
Christian benediction. E. Lohmeyer ―Probleme paulinischer Theologie. I. Briefliche
Grussüberschriften,‖ (ZNW 26 [1927], 158–73) argued that the form was dependent on Near
Eastern epistolary antecedents while the wording and content represented a traditional early
church formula used to introduce a service of worship. Friedrich (ZNW 46 [1955], 272–74),
Schenk (Segen, 88–92) and others denied the liturgical borrowing on the grounds that
neither Paul (cf. 1 Thess 1:1) nor the writers of the post-Pauline letters (1 Pet 1:2; 2 Pet 1:2;
2 John 3; Rev 1:4) preserved the formula always unchanged. Jewett (ATR 51 [1969], 18–34)
located the origin of the NT benediction (particularly those found in the bodies of the letters)
in ―some portion of Early Christian worship which was intrinsically flexible—such as the
sermon‖ (22).
    Recently T. Y. Mullins (AUSS 15 [1977], 59–64), following an earlier suggestion of L.
G. Champion (Benedictions and Doxologies in the Epistles of Paul. Oxford; privately
published, 1934), argued that in the NT there was discernible a basic benediction form, of
which the opening ―grace to you and peace‖ was one type. The several types representing
this form appeared in the LXX with its three basic elements of wish, divine source and
recipient (2 Sam 24:23; Num 6:24–26; Ruth 2:4), and, according to Mullins, the NT form
was patterned after that of the LXX, the OT of the Christian church.
    But none of these sources fully explains both the form and the content of these
epistolary greetings (cf. Wiles, Prayers, 108–14; Berger, ZNW 65, [1974], 191–207). The
suggested substitution of cavri" and caivrein, a play on words involving a small syllabic
addition, denotes a significant theological shift. There are important differences between
each of these supposed antecedents and Paul‘s opening salutations.
We suggest that Paul himself was responsible for the exact character of the opening
salutation, though no doubt some of the form and ingredients were suggested to him from
epistolary and liturgical usage. As such the greeting would be thoroughly appropriate for
his special use as an apostolic salutation and points to the range of blessings (grace and
peace) needed by his readers in greater measure and which the letter was intended to
convey.
    ―Grace‖ (cavri") is a central theological concept that most clearly expresses Paul‘s
understanding of Christ‘s work of salvation (cf. Rom 3:23, 24). Paul‘s message was the
―gospel of the grace of God‖ (Acts 20:24; contrast Gal 1:6); it stood opposed to any idea of
work or merit—indeed the idea of gift (free and unearned) was at the heart of this word (cf.
Eph 2:8, 9). Grace, ―favor toward men contrary to their desert,‖ was attributed to God in his
relations with sinful men (Rom 3:21–26; 4:4; 5:15; etc), and to Christ (Rom 5:15; 1 Cor
16:23) inasmuch as the gracious attitude to men by God was also that of Christ (2 Cor 8:9;
cf. Rom 5:8); and it was the work of Jesus, especially his death, that manifested God‘s
grace (Rom 3:24; 5:2; Eph 1:6, 7). It was the basis of the whole work of salvation.
    In certain circles, by the time Acts was written, early Christians were in the habit of
placing one another under the grace of God, or of the Lord, as a form of farewell greeting.
So members being sent on an important mission (Acts 14:26; 15:40) were commended to
God‘s grace, while the elders of a congregation, during a solemn occasion of farewell, were
commended ―to the Lord and to the word of his grace‖ (Acts 20:32). In these contexts the
theological meaning of ―grace‖ is adapted to the immediate practical concerns for spreading
the gospel (Acts 14:26; 15:40) or of standing fast under affliction (Acts 20:32).
    Paul‘s use of cavri" in his greetings indicates a deep prayerful concern (the element of
intercession is present in the greetings) for the readers. He desires that the Colossians may
apprehend more fully the grace of God in which they already stand (cf: Rom 5:2); at the
same time he is perhaps commissioning his readers ―to renewed Christian living under
grace appropriate to the immediate circumstances‖ (Wiles, Praters, 111).
    The second main word in the benediction, ejirhvnh (―peace‖), suggests a Jewish
background (cf. Ezra 4:17; 5:7). In the LXX the epistolary greeting  is rendered by
eijrhvnh, while in Jewish prayer language generally, as well as in travel prayers in particular,
there was a tendency to make requests for peace (cf. Harder, Paulus, 29; Str-B 1, 380–85).
    eijrhvnh (―peace‖) in secular Greek (Foerster, TDNT 2, 400–402) indicated the antithesis
to war, or the situation resulting from the cessation of war. It denoted the state of law and
order from which the blessings of prosperity would arise.
In the LXX eijrhvnh was almost always used to translate the Hebrew  which occurred
more than 250 times in the OT. Unlike the Greek eijrhvnh the Hebrew term denotes not so
much the opposite of war as of ―any disturbance in the communal well-being of the nation‖
(Brown, NIDNTT 2, 777). So in the LXX under the influence of the Hebrew the Greek
eijrhvnh acquires the sense of general well-being, the source and giver of which is Yahweh
alone.  includes everything given by God in all areas of life (Foerster, TDNT 2, 402);
cf. J. I. Durham, ― and the Presence of God.‖ Proclamation and Presence. Old
Testament essays in honour of Gwynne Henton Davies, ed. J. I. Durham and J. R. Porter,
(London: SCM. 1970, 272–93 American edition [Richmond, VA: John Knox]). It covers
well-being in the widest sense of the word, having a social dimension and is on occasion
linked with righteousness (Isa 48:18; Ps 85:10).
    eijrhvnh occurs ninety-one times in the NT, fifty-four of which occur in the Pauline
corpus. Both as regards its form and content the idea of peace within the NT stands firmly in
the LXX and Hebrew OT tradition, eijrhvnh may be used for harmony among men (Acts 7:26;
Gal 5:22; Eph 4:3; James 3:18) and for the messianic salvation (Luke 1:79; 2:14; 19:42).
The term can describe the content and goal of all Christian preaching, the message itself
being called the ―gospel of peace‖ (Eph 6:15; cf. Acts 10:36; Eph 2:17). The biblical
concept of peace has to do with wholeness, particularly with reference to relationships.
Peace as an order is established by the God of peace (1 Cor 14:33; cf. Rom 15:33; 16:20;
Phil 4:9). Christ is the mediator of that peace (Rom 5:1; Col 1:20). Indeed, he himself is
that peace (Eph 2:14–18).
    Peace is mentioned regularly in the introductory benedictions by both Paul (Rom 1:7; 1
Cor 1:3; 2 Cor 1:2; Gal 1:3; Eph 1:2; Phil 1:2; Col 1:2; 1 Thess 1:1; 2 Thess 1:2; 1 Tim 1:2;
2 Tim 1:2; Tit 1:4; Philem 3) and other NT letter writers (1 Pet 1:2; 2 Pet 1:2; 2 John 3; Jude
2; Rev 1:4), and it featured in closing salutations (Rom 15:33; 16:20; 1 Cor 16:11; 2 Cor
13:11; Gal 6:16; Eph 6:23, cf. v 15; Phil 4:7, 9; 1 Thess 5:23; 2 Thess 3:16; Heb 13:20; 1
Pet 5:14; 2 Pet 3:14; 3 John 15). When Paul, therefore, prays for peace for the Colossians it
is not simply a wish for spiritual prosperity; nor does it signify primarily an internal
condition of contentment. His request is, rather, that they may comprehend more fully the
nature of that relationship of peace which God has established with them.
ajpo; qeou` patro;" hJmw`n. These two wide-ranging blessings of ―grace‖ and ―peace‖ are
said to derive ―from God our Father.‖ As M. Barth aptly comments: ―The giver determines
the contents and value of the gift‖ (Ephesians. Introduction, Translation, and Commentary
on Chapters 1–3 [AB 34; Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1974] 71). However, the form of
the greeting here is unique for Paul in that the words ―and from Christ Jesus our Lord‖ are
not added. (The very uniqueness of the reading speaks in its favor; and in inferior texts
scribes sought to make up the deficiency.) It is difficult to give any adequate reason for the
omission (especially as Moule, 46, reminds us that the apostle moves to ―a description of
Christ in more exalted terms than in any of his other epistles‖), and certainly mistaken to
seek out theological reasons for such a shortening of the formula (so correctly Lohse, 11).

Explanation
    Paul begins the letter to the Colossians in his customary way by mentioning his own
name, along with that of his readers, and by offering a Christian greeting. He writes as an
apostle—his letter has an official character about it—so establishing his credentials with a
congregation that was unknown to him personally. Later he will deal with the theological
and pastoral problems that had arisen at Colossae by exposing and refuting the false
teaching that was beginning to make inroads into the community.
    The readers are described by means of exalted language. They are God‘s holy people,
chosen and set apart for him, and brothers who have been brought into a living relationship
with Christ.
Paul‘s apostolic greeting indicates a deep prayerful concern for these readers that they may
understand and appreciate more fully the grace of God in which they stand and the
relationship of peace that God has established with them.
Thanksgiving: Faith-love-hope and the
Gospel (1:3–8)
Bibliography
Bornkamm, G. ―Die Hoffnung im Kolosserbrief. Zugleich ein Beitrag zur Frage der Echtheit des
Briefes.‖ Studien zum Neuen Testament und zur Patristik. Erich Klostermann zum 90. Geburtstag
dargebracht. TU 77. Berlin: Akademie, 1961, 56–64. Reprinted in Geschichte und Glaube 2.
Gesammelte Aufsätze. Vol. 4. BEvT 53. Munich: Kaiser, 1971, 206–213. Bujard, W.
Untersuchungen. O’Brien, P. T. Introductory Thanksgivings in the Letters of Paul. NovTSup 49.
Leiden: Brill, 1977, 62–104. ———. ―Thanksgiving and the Gospel in Paul.‖ NTS 21 (1974–75)
144–55. Sanders, J. T. ―The Transition from Opening Epistolary Thanksgiving to Body in the
Letters of the Pauline Corpus.‖ JBL 81 (1962) 348–62. Schubert, P. Form and Function of the
Pauline Thanksgivings. BZNW 20. Berlin: Töpelmann, 1939. White, J. L. The Form and Function
of the Body of the Greek Letter: A Study of the Letter-Body in the Non-Literary Papyri and in Paul
the Apostle. SBLDS 2. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1972. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene der
Schöpfung. Untersuchungen zur Formalstruktur und Theologie des Kolosserbriefes. Vienna:
Herder, 1974.

Translation
3
  We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,a when we pray for you
4
  because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love which you show to all
God‘s people. 5Both spring from the hope which lies prepared for you in heaven; you heard
about this hope before when the word of truth, the gospel, 6first came to you. As it is
producing fruit and increasing all over the world so it is among you also (and has done)
since the day you heard and understood the grace of God in all its truth; 7you learned this
from Epaphras our dear fellow-servant who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf
8
  and who has told us of your love in the Spirit.

Note
a
  There are several variants to the reading tw`/ qew`/ patriv ktl. (―to God the Father …‖). D* G
and Chrysostom insert tw`/ (―the‖) before patriv (―Father‖), while •Æ A 1 y
  and many other authorities insert kaiv (―and‖) instead, thus reading tw`/ qew`/ kai; patri ktl
(―to the God and Father …‖). However, the more difficult reading, tw`/ qew`/ patri; tou`
kurivou hJmw`n jIhsou` Cristou` (―to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ‖), is to be
preferred. The rarity of the phrase argues in its favor and it is the reading from which the
variants can be explained. An expression, quite as unusual, is found in chapter 3:17, tw`/ qew`/
patri, ―to God the Father‖—again in the context of thanksgiving—where the manuscript
evidence is even more decisive, cf. Moule, 48, 49.

Form/Structure/Setting
    The second main section of the Pauline letter form (cf. Doty, Letters, 27–33) is the
introductory thanksgiving paragraph. On occasion the more intimate letters of the
Hellenistic period began with a thanksgiving to the gods for personal benefits received.
Evidence of this comes from the beginning of the third century B.C. while the earliest extant
papyrus letter in which eujcaristevw is used of thanksgiving offered to the gods is that
written by Isias (in 168 B.C.) to her husband Hephaistion, begging him to come home.
Examples become more numerous in the following centuries (see Schubert, Form, 158–79)
so that a clear but simple pattern emerges: (1) thanks are offered to the gods (using either
cavri" or eujcaristevw); (2) often there is an assurance that the gods are being petitioned
regularly for the welfare or health of the readers; and (3) the reasons for the thanksgiving to
the gods are mentioned—frequently because they are thought to have saved the writer or
the reader from some calamity.
    This form of introductory thanksgiving is also found in Hellenistic Judaism, as may be
noted from the important paragraph, 2 Maccabees 1:10–13, where a letter from the Jews in
Jerusalem to those living in Egypt is cited. As Schubert rightly pointed out, this example is
functionally and structurally very close to the Pauline thanksgiving paragraph (Form, 117).
    The apostle Paul adopted this Hellenistic epistolary model, frequently using it at the
beginning of his letters as he expressed his gratitude to God, the Father of Jesus Christ, for
what he had effected in the lives of these predominantly Gentile readers. While Paul was
indebted to this epistolary convention he was no ―slavish imitator‖ (Schubert, Form, 119)
of any such literary form since his structures in these thanksgiving paragraphs are highly
developed and sophisticated.
    Furthermore, while the structure of the Pauline thanksgiving periods was Hellenistic
there are good reasons for believing that the contents (apart from their specifically Christian
elements) showed the influence of OT and Jewish thought. This point will be developed in
the detailed exegetical notes below.
Two basic types of structure were noted in Paul‘s thanksgiving paragraphs: the first, which
contained up to seven basic elements, began with the verb of thanksgiving and concluded
with a i{na-clause (or its equivalent) which spelled out the content of the apostle‘s
intercession for the readers. The second type was simpler in form. It also commenced with
the giving of thanks to God (cf. 1 Cor 1:4) and concluded with a o{ti-clause which noted the
reason for this expression of gratitude (cf. Rom 1:8). (For a detailed discussion of these two
main types as well as the mixed structures see Schubert, Form, 10–39, and O‘Brien,
Introductory Thanksgivings, 6–15.)
    The introductory thanksgiving of Colossians is an example of the first type. It consists
of the basic sevenfold structure commencing with (1) the verb of thanksgiving
(eujcaristou`men, ―we give thanks,‖ v 3), then (2) the personal object (tw`/ qew`/ …, ―to
God,‖ v 3) indicating the one who is thanked, (3) a temporal verb (pavntote, ―always‖ v 3)
denoting the frequency with which thanksgiving was offered, (4) a pronominal phrase
(peri; uJmw`n, ―for you,‖ v 3), and (5) a temporal participle (proseucovmenoi, ―praying‖ v 3)
which, because of an apparent digression in verses 6–8, is taken up and repeated in verse 9
as Paul moves to the content of his intercessory prayer. The sixth element (6) is the causal
participial clause (ajkouvsante" th;n pivstin uJmw`n …, ―because we heard of your faith,‖ v
4) which spells out the ground for Paul‘s offering thanks to God. The final feature (7) of
this thanksgiving form is the i{na- clause of verse 10 which indicates the content of the
intercession for the Colossians. (Note Schubert‘s comparative chart, Form, 54–55.)
    Yet, within this basic structure, verses 3–8 are still rather difficult to follow, for this
single sentence contains seven participial expressions, four relative clauses, three
kaqwv"-clauses and unusual prepositional and genitival expressions. Bujard, in his stylistic
analysis, considered that there was no logical progression of thought, but rather an
association of ideas (Untersuchungen, 80). Zeilinger, on the other hand, believed that after
the mention of thanksgiving (v 3) and its ground (v 4) the remainder of the sentence could
be divided into two sections: the first (vv 4d-6a) was balanced by two relative clauses
beginning with h{n, while the second was structured around three kaqwv"-clauses and their
related ejn-phrases (Der Erstgeborene, 34–36).
It is doubtful, however, whether such an analysis carries conviction and Bujard‘s comment
about the association of ideas needs to be kept in view when giving an exegesis of the
passage. Lohse rightly remarks that after the reason for thanksgiving has been set forth
(ajkouvsante" … th;n pivstin uJmw`n … kai th;n ajgavphn … dia; th;n ejlpivda, vv 4–5a)
several subordinate clauses are added: verse 5b (h}n prohkouvsate) is related to the
Colossians‘ hope, verse 6a refers to the world-wide scope of the proclamation (kaqw;" kai;
ejn panti; tw`/ kovsmw/ …), while verses 6b-7 point back to the initial preaching to the
Colossians by Epaphras (kaqw;" kai; ejn uJmi`n, v 6b; kaqw;" ejmavqete ajpo; ÆEpafra` , v 7).
See Lohse, 13, 14.

Comment
     3. eujcaristou`men. Paul writes ―we give thanks‖ rather than ―I give thanks.‖ The plural
is used (as in the Thessalonian correspondence: 1 Thess 1:2; 2:13, 3:9; 2 Thess 1:3; 2:13),
not as an epistolary plural, nor because Paul stood at a distance from the Colossians, but
since he was writing on behalf of Timothy and perhaps others as well as himself. When
later in the same chapter he wishes to emphasize his own ministry as an apostle to the
Gentiles and its eschatological significance, he changes to the first person singular (vv.
23–27, ou| ejgenovmhn ejgw; Pau`lo" diavkono" … nu`n caivrw ktl., ―of which I, Paul,
became a minister … now I rejoice …‖).
It is also possible that the plural ―we give thanks whenever we pray‖ may draw attention to
the regular gathering together for prayer by Paul and his colleagues to give thanks to God
for the Colossian Christians.
     Some writers consider that thanksgiving was an activity engaged in because of personal
benefits received and was therefore a descent from the lofty heights of praise. But although
our English word ―thank‖ means to express gratitude to a person for something received,
and is therefore to some extent a manregarding expression for praise, Paul‘s use of
eujcaristevw (―I give thanks‖), in the introductory paragraphs of his letters at least, is
broader than this. For in each of these passages (though cf. v 12) Paul employs eujcaristevw
consistently of thanksgiving for God‘s work in the lives of others, i.e. the readers, and
eujloghtov" (―blessed,‖ ―be praised‖) for blessings in which he himself participated (2 Cor
1:3–5; Eph 1:3–12). Furthermore, when Paul employs eujcaristevw while the notion of
gratitude is clearly present, the element of praise is not therefore absent. The corporate
aspect of thanksgiving is often stressed by the apostle (2 Cor 1:11; Col 3:15–17).
     We may suppose that Paul‘s report echoed his actual expression of gratitude and that, as
he dictated his letter, thanksgiving to God once again welled up within him. (On the
importance of thanksgiving in Colossians see 108, 205, 206.)
     tw`/ qew`/ patri; tou` kuriou hJmw`n ÆIhsou` Cristou`. The apostle does not congratulate
the Colossians. Instead he directs his prayer of thanksgiving to ―God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.‖ This phrase is different from the usual short formulation ―I give thanks to
God‖ (1 Cor 1:4, cf. 1 Thess 1:2; 2 Thess 1:3) and the more personal form ―I give thanks to
my God‖ (Phil 1:3; Phlm 4), and is somewhat reminiscent of Romans 1:8, ―I give thanks to
my God through Jesus Christ.‖ At first sight the designation appears to be a stereotyped
expression taken over from the worship of the early church, being employed in prayer with
eujloghtov" (2 Cor 1:3; 11:31; Eph 1:3; cf. 1 Pet 1:3), eujcariostevw (Eph 1:17), as a
summons to a doxology in Romans 15:6 and as the source of ―grace and peace‖ in
Philemon 3.
     There is a textual problem as already noted and the more difficult reading (cited above)
is to be followed and rendered as ―God who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ‖ (Moule,
49). Paul expressed his gratitude to God in words that may have been used in early
Christian worship but by omitting the article before patriv he stressed that the God to
whom thanksgiving was offered is the one whom Jesus reveals to us in his character as
Father (1:2, 3, 12; 3:17).
     pavntote … proseucovmenoi. By means of the adverb ―always‖ the apostle indicates
the frequency with which he gave thanks. However, by using this term he was not referring
to unceasing thanksgiving. To speak of prayer by this and similar terms (e.g. ―continually,‖
―at all times,‖ ―day and night‖) was part and parcel of the style of ancient letters, being a
Jewish practice as well as a pagan one. A measure of hyperbole is also to be noted in these
expressions. When Paul states he gave thanks ―always‖ or ―continually‖ he means that he
regularly remembered them in his times of prayer: morning, noon and evening (the
customary three hours each day), and whenever else he prayed. Here the adverb pavntote is
further explained by proseucovmenoi (―when we pray for you‖).
4. ajkouvsante" th;n pivstin uJmw`n ktl. The basis for Paul‘s thanksgiving is expressed by
means of this causal clause (cf. Phil 1:6; Phlm 5). He recalls the good reports that had been
given to him about this congregation. ajkouvsante", by itself, does not indicate that Paul did
not know the Colossians, but rather that he had received news about them via Epaphras
who had referred to their ―love in the Spirit,‖ verse 8. We do know, however, from chapter
2:1–2 that the church was unknown to the apostle, even though individual members like
Philemon had met him.
     pivstin … ajgavphn … ejlpivda. The familiar Christian triad of faith-lovehope occurs
within the causal clause. One or more elements of this formula were often a basis for the
apostle‘s expression of gratitude to God (faith, love and hope: 1 Thess 1:3; faith and love:
Eph 1:15 some manuscripts; 2 Thess 1:3; Phlm 5: faith: Rom 1:8). The triad appears
elsewhere in the Pauline corpus (Rom 5:1–5; Gal 5:5–6; Eph 4:2–5), but may not have been
the apostle‘s creation since it was also employed elsewhere in early Christian literature
(Heb 6:10–12; 10:22–24; 1 Pet 1:3–8, 21–22; Barn 1:4; 11:8; Ign Pol. 3:2–3). It seems to
have been a sort of compendium of the Christian life current in the early apostolic church,
and according to A.M. Hunter‘s suggestion (Paul and his Predecessors 2nd ed. (London:
SCM, 1961, 33: American edition [Philadelphia: Westminster]) may have derived from
Jesus himself. This passage could then represent Paul‘s own exegesis of the triad.
     The ―faith‖ of the Colossians is naturally mentioned first, for apart from it there would
be no Christian existence (cf. Rom 10:9). This faith is ―in Christ Jesus‖ (ejn Cristw`/
ÆIhsou`), an expression which does not denote the object to which their faith is directed but
rather indicates the sphere in which ―faith‖ lives and acts. The Colossian Christians live
under the lordship of Christ Jesus for they have been incorporated into him. That is why
they have been addressed as ―the saints and faithful brethren in Christ at Colossae‖ (v 2).
Some of the implications of living under this lordship will be spelled out in the later
sections of the letter.
     A faith which one may hear about (ajkouvsante"; cf. ajkouvwn, Phlm 5) and recount as
Paul does here proves its reality by ―working through love‖ (Gal 5:6). ajgavph is ―the
practical expression of care and concern‖ (Martin, NCB, 48) which is directed to all of
God‘s holy people (the pavnta" accentuates the breadth of the love; so Lohse, 17), i.e.
Christians generally, particularly those at Colossae and in the other churches of the Lycus
valley. It is through love that Christians serve one another (Gal 5:13) and the Colossians,
according to Epaphras‘ reports, knew something of this service.
5. dia; th;n ejlpivda. The three elements of this summary of the Christian life are ―not
completely co-ordinated‖ (Bruce, 180). ―Faith‖ and ―love,‖ grounds for Paul‘s
thanksgiving, are based on ―hope.‖ The last is here emphasized and it clearly formed part of
the apostolic message which the congregation had heard and accepted. Moule claims ―it is
remarkable that trust and love are described as dependent on ejlpiv"—the goal of Christian
expectation‖ (49).
     Both ejlpiv" (―hope‖) and its cognate verb ejlpivzw (―hope‖) were used in the Pauline
letters to denote the act of hoping as well as the objective content of the hope. Hope is
oriented to that which is unseen in the future, the content of which is defined in various
ways: salvation (1 Thess 5:8), righteousness (Gal 5:5), resurrection in an incorruptible body
(1 Cor 15:52–55), eternal life (Titus 1:2; 3:7) and God‘s glory (Rom 5:2). On occasions in
Paul the disposition of hoping is emphasized (Rom 4:18; 5:5; 12:12; 1 Cor 13:7), though
Romans 8:24–25 shows that the term could be employed by the apostle in both ways within
the one context (a point which Bornkamm, TU 77 [1961] 56–64, seems to have overlooked).
In Colossians the concrete meaning is to the fore (so 1:23, 27, and the related ideas of
3:1–4), and in verse 5 ejlpiv" denotes ―the content of hope,‖ ―that which is hoped for‖ (so
Meyer, 256 and others). It already lies prepared (ajpokeimevnhn) for them in the heavens, a
phrase from common parlance denoting certainty (see Lohse, 17–18, for details). The
Colossian Christians are assured that everything contained in their hope is kept for them in
its right place—in heaven where no power, human or otherwise, can touch it. Though now
hidden from men‘s view that hope, which is centered on Christ himself (he is hJ ejlpi;" th`"
dovxh", 1:27), will finally be revealed when he is revealed (3:4). That is why these believers
in the Lycus valley are to direct their thoughts heavenward (3:1–4).
     Their hope is clearly oriented toward the future, but because it is at this moment being
kept safe for them (ajpokeimevnhn is a present participle) it has present and immediate
ramifications, not least as the basis for their ongoing faith and exercise of Christian love
(e[cete is also a present tense). To suggest, with some of the older commentators that faith
has to do with the past alone, love only with the present, and hope simply with reference to
the future is to make a distinction that is not supported from this passage. (In Jewish
apocalyptic literature God‘s future salvation was described as presently being reserved for
the pious: 4 Ezra 7:14; 2 Bar 14:12. cf. H.-W. Kuhn, Enderwartung und gegenwärtiges
Heil. Untersuchungen zu den Gemeindeliedern von Qumran (SUNT 4; Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1966, 181–88.)
     Paul has gone out of his way to stress this third element of the triad, hope (Bornkamm,
TU 77 [1961] 58). It is described as the content of the gospel or at least one of its significant
elements (cf. 1:23, 27).
     Why this emphasis? It is quite likely that ―the false teachers at Colossae were intending
to rob them (sc. the believers) of this aspect of the Christian message, possibly by denying
any future dimension of Christian salvation‖ (Martin, NCB, 48). If this is so, then it was
necessary for the apostle to underscore again the nature of their Christian hope, as
originally taught by Epaphras. That Paul is stressing what is true over against the false
teaching is further suggested by the statements about the gospel which immediately follow:
it is true, universal, powerfully effective and is concerned with God‘s grace—phrases
which probably contrast the Colossian error.
     prohkouvsate ejn tw`/ lovgw/ th`" ajlhqeiva" tou` eujaggevliou. The apostle was not
telling the congregation anything new when he wrote about the heavenly hope. They had
heard about it before (pro-hkouvsate) when the gospel message was first proclaimed at
Colossae by Epaphras (vv 7–8) and the congregation was founded (so Lohse, 18; Moule,
50, suggests it means ―heard before the false teaching‖). The phrase ―the word of truth of
the gospel‖ is best rendered with many commentators including Calvin: ―the word of truth,
which is the gospel.‖ Schweizer (36, 37) and others rightly understand this against an Old
Testament background where God‘s word, spoken and revealed to men, is ―the word of
truth.‖ So the Psalmist prays ―take not the word of truth … out of my mouth‖ (Ps 119:43;
the term ―hope‖ appears in the same context). God‘s word partakes of his character and is
utterly reliable.
By describing the message as the ―word of truth‖ (cf. Bultmann, TDNT 1, 244) a contrast
with the false teaching of the Colossian heretics seems intended (against Hooker, Christ,
3150–31). Their message, elements of which may be gleaned from the following passages
of the letter, especially chapter 2, was not only misleading, but also a delusion. It was
empty, false and vain (cf. 2:8 where it is described as kenh`" ajpavth", ―empty deceit‖).
Here the ―word of truth‖ is in apposition to the ―gospel‖ for it was in the proclamation of
the gospel that God‘s true word was announced.
     6. Several features of that gospel are now set forth. First, it had made its triumphal
progress, coming to the Colossian congregation (parovnto" eiv" uJma`") and taking up a sure
place in their lives (so Chrysostom and several recent commentators). Also, its progress at
Colossae was at one (kaqw;" kaiv) with its dynamic spread throughout the world (ejn panti;
tw`/ kovsmw/). As the gospel produced a vigorous and increasing fruit of Christian life and
testimony at Colossae, so (kaqw;" kaiv) it was doing the same throughout the world. In
contrast to the false teaching with its restricted appeal this message was truly catholic
(Lightfoot, 132, 133).
     ÆEn panti; tw`/ kovsmw/. This phrase, along with similar universalistic passages (Rom
1:8; 10:18; 1 Thess 1:8) is not to be understood as a meaningless or ―wild exaggeration‖ (as
Scott, 16, claims). Certainly Paul did not mean that the whole world distributively, that is,
every person under heaven, had been touched by the triumphal progress of the gospel. He
has particularly in mind cities and towns, e.g. Damascus, Tarsus, Antioch, Corinth,
Ephesus, etc, as centers from which the gospel moved further afield.
     Bruce (181) claims that if Paul‘s language appears to have outstripped what had
actually been accomplished at the time it was because he was indulging in prophetic
prolepsis. It was with the eye of a true prophet that he described ―the all-pervading course
of the message of life rivalling that of the heavenly bodies of which the psalmist spoke:
‗their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world‘ (Rom
10:18, quoting Ps. 19:4).‖
     karpoforouvmenon kai; aujxanovmenon. These participles, ―bearing fruit and
increasing,‖ which refer to the continuing progress of the gospel echo OT language (against
Ernst, 158). ―To bear fruit and to grow‖ is a frequent combination used first of human
reproduction (Gen 1:22, 28; cf. 8:17; 9:1, 7) and subsequently of Israel‘s population
increase (Jer 3:16; 23:3). No metaphorical use of the phrase, however, occurs in the O T. It is
always applied to people or animals. But in the parable of the sower (Mark 4) the seed,
which is interpreted as the ―word,‖ bears fruit and increases in the lives of those who
receive it rightly. Like the seed in the parable of the sower the word of the gospel bears
fruit and grows. With Chrysostom and several modern commentators ―fruit-bearing‖ is to
be understood as a crop of good deeds (cf. Phil 1:11 where karpov", ―fruit,‖ is found with
this meaning), while the growth of the gospel points to the increasing number of converts.
kaqw;" kai; ejn uJmi`n. With the addition of the words ―so among yourselves‖ (a second
kaqwv"-clause, cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 35, 36) the writer‘s train of thought moves
back from the world-wide aspect of the gospel‘s dynamic progress to the beginnings of the
congregation at Colossae. This additional phrase is not an afterthought, as some
commentators suppose, but reminds the Colossians in an objective way (Schweizer, 38)
that they too shared in this world-wide action of God‘s word. They continued to grow ―in
spiritual character and in actual numbers‖ (Bruce, 181) from the time when they first heard
and believed the gospel. This apostolic proclamation focused on the grace of God (on the
centrality of ―grace‖ in the initial proclamation at Colossae see Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief,
105, 106; cf. Acts 20:24). The Colossians both heard (hjkouvsate) this message of God‘s
gracious action in Christ and came to know (ejpevgnwte is an inceptive aorist, so Beare,
154) the reality of that grace when they were converted (R. Bultmann, Theology of the New
Testament. Vol. 1. Tr K. Grobel [NY: Scribner, 1952] 67).
    ejn ajlhqeiva/ (―in truth‖) has been taken by some commentators in an adverbial sense (=
―truly‖) to mean that the Colossian Christians understood the message of God‘s grace ―as it
truly is,‖ ―untravestied‖ (Moule, 51). They did not receive some garbled version from their
evangelist Epaphras which then needed to be supplemented by later teachers with their
philosophy (2:8, 20). Other exegetes understand the phrase ejn ajlhqeiva/ as a reference to
the previous description of the gospel (e.g. Lohse, 20), corresponding to ejn tw`/ lovgw/ th`"
ajlhqeiva" ―in the word of truth‖) of verse 5. On this view the apostle is stating that the
congregation understood the apostolic message (lovgo") presented by Epaphras as ―the
truth,‖ that is, ―God‘s truth.‖ It was not manmade, and since it centered on God‘s grace ―it
sets men free from superstition and bad religion‖ (Martin, NCB, 49).
    Since this congregation knows the ―word of truth‖ (v 5) and understood the ―grace of
God in truth‖ from the beginning, its Christian direction has already been set. It needs to
come to a greater knowledge and understanding of God‘s will (1:9–10) and to know Christ
more fully (2:2), in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden.
    Paul has gone out of his way here to stress the dynamic, indeed almost personal,
activity of the gospel (see O‘Brien, NTS 21 [1974–75] 144–55). In fact, the term
eujaggevlion (―gospel‖) and its synonyms martuvrion (―testimony‖), lovgo" (―word‖) and oJ
lovgo" tou` qeou` (―word of God‖) occur frequently within Paul‘s introductory paragraphs
and the majority of the references to these terms are bound up with Paul‘s actual
thanksgivings for the churches, as they stand either in an immediate or a more distant
causal relationship to the verb of thanksgiving. In one way or another the apostle‘s
thanksgivings to God for his working in the lives of the readers are causally linked to the
gospel or its right reception: so Paul is grateful for the Philippians‘ active participation
(koinwniva) in the gospel (1:5), that the testimony to Christ had been confirmed in the
Corinthians‘ midst (1 Cor 1:6), and that the Thessalonians had been called through the
gospel (2 Thess 2:14), and welcomed the word of God (1 Thess 2:13) when it came to them
dynamically (1 Thess 1:5, 6).
    It is a well-known fact that eujaggevlion within the Pauline corpus is often used as a
nomen actionis and this is the case in several instances where the noun appears within
Paul‘s prayers of thanksgiving (Phil 1:5; Rom 1:9). The dynamic character of the gospel is
accented in Paul‘s first introductory thanksgiving (1 Thess 1:5–6) where the manner of its
coming was truly powerful, for it was not simply in word but also ―in power and in the
Holy Spirit and with full conviction.‖
A further point to be noted is that terms which are predicated of the gospel‘s activity—its
coming (1 Thess 1:5), confirmation (1 Cor 1:6), or its bearing fruit and increasing (Col
1:6)—are employed with a slight change in meaning of the believers themselves.
Fruit-bearing and increasing were marks of the gospel (Col 1:6). Paul then prays (see
below) that fruit-bearing and increasing may be characteristics of the Colossians too—the
fruit of good works and an increase in the knowledge of God (v 10)—that the dynamic of
the gospel may characterize the lives of the Colossian believers themselves.
    7. kaqw;" ejmavqete ajpo; jEpafra`. A third ―just as‖ (kaqw;") clause indicates how the
Colossian Christians heard and understood the grace of God: they learned (ejmavqete) the
gospel from Epaphras. Usually Paul describes the acceptance of the gospel as ―believing,‖
―hearing‖ or ―obeying‖ rather than ―learning,‖ and the verb manqavnw itself is found rather
infrequently (for details see Rengstorf, TDNT 4, 406–12).
    Masson (92) suggests, on the basis of the relative infrequency of the verb manqavnw in
Paul, that the apostle chose this verb intentionally so as to endorse Epaphras‘ ministry over
against the new and pernicious, heretical teaching. The term ―learned‖ (ejmavqete) probably
indicates that Epaphras had given them systematic instruction in the gospel rather than
some flimsy outline and that these Colossians had committed themselves as disciples to that
teaching (cf. 2:6, 7).
    The name Epaphras (ÆEpafra`") is a short form of Epaphroditus (ÆEpafrovditu"), a
very common name found frequently in inscriptions and the papyri of the period (BAG,
283). He is mentioned again at chapter 4:12, 13 and in Philemon 23 where he is described
as Paul‘s fellow-captive (sunaicmavlwto"), meaning no doubt that he shared one of Paul‘s
many imprisonments, possibly in Ephesus. (There is insufficient evidence for identifying
him with the Epaphroditus of Phil 2:25; 4:18.) As a native of Colossae (oJ ejx uJmw`n, 4:12)
he had been the evangelist of the Lycus valley where now there were flourishing
churches—in Hierapolis and Laodicea as well as in Colossae. Epaphras had discharged his
responsbilities faithfully (tistov") and the presence of these congregations testified to the
enduring character of his work (Bruce, 182).
tou` ajgaphtou` sundouvlou hJmw`n … pisto;" uJpe;r hJmw`n diavkono" tou` Cristou`. The
designations used of Epaphras, however, not only express the apostle‘s confidence in him.
They also state significantly that he is Paul‘s representative in Colossae who has worked
and who will continue to work in his place within the congregation. Epaphras is here
described as ―our beloved fellowservant‖ while at chapter 4:12 he is called by the predicate
of honor, a ―servant of Christ Jesus‖ (dou`lo" Cristou` ÆIhsou`). In the OT ―servant of God‖
was a title of honor to refer to those chosen by God and predestined for his service.
Abraham (Ps 105:42), Moses (Ps 105:26; 2 Kings 18:12), David (2 Sam 7:5; Ps 89:4, 21)
and others, especially the prophets (Amos 3:7), were God‘s servants. The last named were
servants of the Word of the Lord who were to proclaim the message entrusted to them. In
the NT an apostle was also a ―servant of Christ Jesus‖ (Gal 1:10; cf. Rom 1:1). By styling
Epaphras a ―beloved fellow-servant‖ Paul draws attention to his reliable associate who
guarantees to the church at Colossae that they received the true apostolic gospel.
     Epaphras is also designated a ―minister (diavkono") of Christ.‖ This term (diavkono")
originally denoted one who rendered service of a lowly kind (Beyer, TDNT 2, 91, 92) and
was used in a variety of ways (cf. BAG, 184, 185) in the NT (at Rom 15:8 Christ himself is a
―servant to the circumcision,‖ diavkono" peritomh`"; while at 2 Cor 11:23 and Eph 3:7 the
apostle is a ―minister‖ of Christ). Significantly in many of Paul‘s references it is one of a
series of designations (cf. sunergov", ajdelfov", koinwnov" and ajpovstolo") used of his
associates in his missionary activity. The diavkonoi, according to Ellis (NTS 17 [1970–71]
438, 440), were a special class of co-workers who were active in preaching and teaching
(cf. 1 Cor 3:5). So Timothy is a minister of God (1 Thess 3:2; 1 Tim 4:6) and so is Tychicus
a minister in the Lord (Col 4:7; Eph 6:21). Epaphras has ministered on Paul‘s behalf
(reading uJpe;r hJmw`n, ―on our behalf‖ with P46 a
     * A B
           etc, rather than uJpe;r uJmw`n, ―on your behalf‖) and so the Colossians may be sure
that the ―truth‖ was faithfully taught to them (cf. H. Merklein, Das kirchliche Aret nach
dent Epheserbrief [SANT 33; Munich: Kösel, 1973] 337–40, and E. Lohse, ―Die Mitarbeiter
des Apostels Paulus im Kolosserbrief,‖ Verborum Ventas. Festschrift für Gustav Stöhlin,
ed. O. Bocher and K. Haacker [Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1970] 189–94).
     8. oJ kai; dhlwvsa" hJmi`n. More recently Epaphras had visited Paul in Rome and told
him how the churches were faring. As apostle to the Gentiles Paul has a responsibility to
the congregation at Colossae and no doubt he would be grateful for the reports given to
him. Much of Epaphras‘ news was encouraging and although some aspects of the
Colossians‘ church life were disquieting Paul for the moment dwells on those worthy of
praise.
th;n uJmw`n ajgavphn ejn pneuvmati. This phrase indicates that the community‘s life was
filled with a love generated by the Holy Spirit, enabling it to come to the help of all the
saints (so Lohse, 23). No doubt these believers cherished a warm affection for Paul even
though many had not met him personally (cf. 2:1). And the fact that they demonstrated this
love in the Spirit toward Paul (as well as to others) would make it easier for him to exhort
them about the dangers of the false teaching.

Explanation
    In accordance with his usual custom Paul began his letter to the Colossians by reporting
his thanksgiving to God for the faith and love of his readers. This faith which they have as
men and women in Christ Jesus and the love they continue to show toward Christians
around them are both based on a sure and certain hope that is kept for them in heaven
where no power, human or otherwise, can touch it. Such a hope is centered on Christ
himself (1:27) and was an essential element of the gospel Epaphras preached (cf. v 23).
That gospel produced a vigorous and increasing fruit of Christian life and testimony at
Colossae and was working in the same dynamic way throughout the rest of the world.
Epaphras, as Paul‘s faithful co-worker, representative and minister of Christ, had diligently
taught the Colossians that gospel. They may, therefore, be assured that they had been
instructed in the ―truth.‖
    In this opening paragraph Paul begins to set the tone (which, incidentally, is not as
warm as in the Philippian counterpart, 1:3–11) and introduce some of the themes that will
be expanded in the rest of the letter. He does not attack the Colossian heresy as such. After
all, he is reporting his thanksgiving to God. But Paul‘s positive descriptions of the gospel,
the Colossians‘ response to it, and Epaphras‘ ministry all appear to be set over against
something that is false. As the letter unfolds the nature of the error becomes more specific
and clear.
At the same time by reporting that he gives thanks to God in connection with the faith, love
and hope of the Colossians, and by mentioning the gospel and its world-wide fruitfulness
together with the ministry of Epaphras, Paul instructs these Christian readers about those
issues he considers vital. (On the didactic and exhortatory function of these introductory
paragraphs, see below 29, 30.)
     The mention of both the thanksgiving and the intercessory prayer which follows would
no doubt help to strengthen the ties of fellowship between the apostle to the Gentiles and
this congregation in the Lycus valley, most of whom he had come to know about through
the reports of his colleague, Epaphras. In the offering of these prayers as well as in his
telling them about it Paul clearly demonstrates his pastoral and apostolic concern for these
Christians.




An Intercession for Knowledge and Godly
Conduct (1:9–14)
Bibliography
Bornkamm, G. Studien zu Antike und Urchristentum. Gesammelte Aufsätze. Vol. 2. BEvT 28.
Munich: Kaiser, 1959. Deichgräber, R. Gotteshymnus und Christushymnus in der frühen
Christenheit. Untersuchungen zu Form, Sprache und Stil der frühchristlichen Hymen. SUNT 5.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1967. Käsemann, E. Essays, 149–68. Montague, G. T.
Growth in Christ. A Study in Saint Paul‘s Theology of Progress. Fribourg, Switz.: Regina Mundi,
1961, 69–80. O’Brien, P. T. Introductory Thanksgivings, 62–104. Schubert, P. Form. Zeilinger,
F. Der Erstgeborene, 36–39, 73–79.

Translation
9
  For this reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped earnestly praying
for you that God may fill you with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and
understanding, 10 in order that you may lead a life worthy of the Lord and may please him
in every way; bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God, 11 being
strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may show great
endurance and patience, and joyfully 12 giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you
to share in the inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light, 13 For he has rescued us
from the tyranny of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son he loves, 14 in
whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.

Form/Structure/Setting
The second major section of Paul‘s thanksgiving paragraph commences at verse 9, dia;
tou`to kai; hJmei`". ajfÆ h|" hJmevra" hjkouvsamen ktl (―for this reason, since the day we
heard about you‖), and it spells out the content of his intercessory prayer report. The links
between the thanksgiving and the intercession are strongly emphasized by: (a) the words
dia; tou`to kai; hJmei`" … ouj pauovmeqa uJpe;r uJmw`n proseucovdmenoi … (―for this reason
… we have not stopped praying for you‖), verse 9, pick up and echo those of verse 3,
eujcari" tou`men … pavntote peri; uJmw`n proseucovmenoi (―we give thanks … always
when we pray for you‖; cf. Phil 1:9; 2 Thess 1:11 where a similar device is used to link the
two sections); and by: (b) the repetition of terms and ideas already used in the thanksgiving:
so, for example, ―since the day‖ (vv 6, 9), ―we heard‖ (vv 4, 9), ―knowledge‖ (vv 6, 9, 10),
―bearing fruit and increasing‖ (vv 6, 10), ―giving thanks‖ (vv 3, 12), ―the Father‖ (vv 3,
12), ―the saints‖ (vv 4, 12), ―spiritual‖ of verse 9 corresponds to ―in spirit‖ of verse 8, while
―the inheritance … in light‖ (v 12) may well overlap in meaning with ejlpiv" as the ―object
of hope‖ (v 5). It remains only to draw attention to the repeated use of ―all‖ (pa`") in both
sections (vv 4, 6, 9, 10, 11). ―The resumption of these phrases and concepts clearly
indicates that the thanksgiving and intercession are closely connected‖ (Lohse, 24).
    After the main verb ―we have not ceased to pray‖ (ouj pauovmeqa … proseucovmenoi, v
9) the content of the prayer is indicated by the i{na-clause: ―that you may be filled …‖ (i{na
plhrwqh`te, v 9). An infinitive construction indicates the purpose for which the readers are
to be filled with a knowledge of God‘s will, namely ―to walk worthily of the Lord‖
(peripath`sai ajxivw" tou` kurivou, v 10) while the four participles which follow, ―bearing
fruit‖ (karpoforou`nte", v 10), ―increasing‖ (aujxanovmenoi, v 10), ―being strengthened‖
(dunamouvmenoi, v 11) and ―giving thanks‖ (eujcaristou`nte", v 12), define more precisely
what is involved in walking worthily of the Lord and pleasing him in all things. Each of the
four participles is modified by a prepositional phrase, and so the whole paragraph may be
structured as follows:

dia; tou`to kai; hJmei`" …

proseucovmenoi kai; ai;touvmenoi …

i{na plhrwqh`te …

peripath`sai ajxivw" tou` kurivou …


ejn panti; e{rgw/ ajgauw`/
karpoyorou`nte"


aujxanovmenoi th/` ejpignwvsei tou` qeou`

ejn pavsh/ dunavmei
dunamouvmenoi

meta" cara`"
eujcaraistou`nte" …
    In verses 13 and 14 which are probably to be understood as an exposition of verse 12
(being fitted for God‘s inheritance in the realm of light meant that he had delivered them
out of the realm of darkness, translated them into the kingdom of his beloved Son and given
them redemption) two relative sentences occur (o}" ejrruvsato, v 13, and ejn w\/ e[comen, v
14), the first of which has two lines in contrasting parallelism:


13a o{" ejrrudsato hJma`" ejk th`" exousias" tou` skovtous"

13b kai; metevsthsen eij" th;n basileivan tou` uijou` th`" ajgavphs" a
    Not all commentators, however, are agreed that Paul‘s intercession extends to verse 14.
A considerable and influential body of continental scholarly opinion is convinced that the
prayer-report concludes with the words about patience and long-suffering in verse 11. meta;
cara`" eujcaristou`nte" (―joyfully giving thanks‖) introduces the community‘s confession
of faith in Christ. On this view verses 12–20 are understood as a unit with verses 12–14
being regarded by Käsemann (Essays, 154, 155) and others as an introit to a baptismal
liturgy (Bornkamm, Studien, 188–203, and N. A. Dahl, ―Anamnesis. Mémoire et
Commémoration dans le Christianisme primitif,‖ ST 1 [1948] 86, 87, understand the hymnic
confession in a eucharistic context). Our criticism of this division (cf. Introductory
Thanksgivings, 71–75) is threefold: first, it is not at all clear why eujcaristou`nte" is to be
separated from the preceding participles (which we have suggested define more precisely
what it means ―to walk worthily of the Lord‖) and understood as a summons or in an
imperatival way. Second, although eujcaristevw was used in a wider sense than simply the
giving of thanks for personal benefits received it is doubtful whether it was employed as a
technical term to introduce a confession (cf. Bornkamm, Studien, 196, 197, and note
Deichgräber‘s criticisms, Gotteshymnus, 145, 146). Third, Käsemann‘s particular view of
the whole section being ―an early Christian baptismal liturgy‖ is unproven. We do not
know enough about early Christian liturgies to be able to make pronouncements with this
certainty.
Paul‘s thanksgiving period extends from verses 3–14 (containing a thanksgiving report, vv
3–8, and an intercessory prayer report, vv 9–14). It does not have a well-rounded and
clear-cut climax, but passes almost imperceptibly from the form of a prayer to that of a
creed or hymn. Some of the terms and ideas of verses 12–14 may have been associated with
baptism but in their present context are the basis of joyful thanksgiving to the Father.

Comment
    9. dia; tou`to kai; hJmei`", ajf ajf h|" jh\" hJmevra" hjkouvsamen ktl. ―For this reason,
since the day we heard about you …‖ Paul picks up the thread of his prayer-report of verses
3–5 and, as we have seen, goes out of his way to link the petition with the thanksgiving.
The ―we‖ (hJmei`") stresses the identity of the ones who intercede with those who have
given thanks. From the day he learned of their progress as Christians, the apostle not only
offered constant thanksgiving to God the Father, he also added regular intercession for
them. The word ―asking‖ (aijtouvmenoi) is used synonymously with ―praying‖
(proseucovmenoi; cf, Mark 11:24, where the verbs have an exact parallel, ―Whatever you
ask in prayer [proseuvcesqe kai; aijtei`sqe], believe that you receive it, and you will‖;
against Meyer, 262, who understands the latter word to refer to general prayer), and
together the two verbs probably indicate that the apostle along with his colleagues prayed to
God with great intensity so that his request might be granted (Lohse, 25).
i{na plhrwqh`te th;m ejpiv gnwsin tou` qelhvmato" aujtou`. The content (i{na) of the petition
is that God (the passive plhrwqh`te shows it is he who supplies this knowledge in
abundance) might fill the Colossian Christians with a perception of his will, which consists
of an understanding of what is spiritually important. This would result in conduct that is
pleasing to the Lord, i.e. a harvest of good deeds and growth in understanding (v 10). The
power that would enable them to act in such a manner exercising patience and
long-suffering would be derived from God‘s glorious might (v 11). At the same time, they
would give thanks to the Father for an eternal inheritance, deliverance from the power of
darkness, and the forgiveness of sins (vv 12–14). Thus, Paul‘s actual petition is for the
discernment of God‘s will and the power to perform it (cf. Moule, 47; note Phil 1:9–11 as a
parallel).
    The ideas of ―fullness,‖ ―abundance‖ or ―riches‖ feature frequently in Paul‘s prayers (cf.
1 Cor 1:5; Phil 1:9; 4:19; 1 Thess 3:12; 2 Thess 1:3). The motif of ―fullness‖ recurs
frequently in this epistle (note the different terms used at 1:19, 24, 25; 2:2, 3, 9, 10; 4:12,
17), and it seems that the false teachers boasted that they offered the fullness of truth and
spiritual maturity, while Epaphras had only instructed the Colossians in the first steps
(Beare, 156). On the contrary, Epaphras had taught ―the word of truth‖ (v 5) while Paul and
his colleagues had consistently prayed (cf. 4:12) that the Colossians might receive fullness
of blessing from God‘s gracious hand (note the passive peplhroforhmevnoi), and he
indicates in the prayer that unfolds what that fullness is.
    ejn pavsh/ sofiva/ kaiv sunevsei pneuatikh/. The readers are to be filled ―with a
knowledge of his will.‖ The words which follow define what this means, i.e. the
―perception of God‘s will consists in wisdom and understanding of every sort, on the
spiritual level,‖ to use Moule‘s paraphrase (53). These and the following words find clear
OT parallels (on the Greco-Roman links see Lohse, 26, and Schweizer, 40). So ―his will (to;
qevlhma aujtou`: Ps 103 [LXX 102]: 7; 143 [142]: 10), ―knowledge‖ (ejpivgnwsi"), ―wisdom
and understanding‖ (sofiva kaiv suvnesi"), and their conjunction with pneu`ma ―spirit‖ turn
up in the OT (cf. Exod 31:3; 35:31, 35: Deut 34:9; 1 Chron 22:12; Isa 11:2; etc, also the
fourth benediction of the Tefillah), and are no doubt to be understood against this
background (so Harder, Paulus, 118, 119, Lohmeyer, 32, 33). Furthermore, similar ideas
appear in the writings of the Qumran community (for detailed parallels see Lohse, 25, 26).
These three qualities of ―knowledge,‖ ―insight‖ and ―wisdom‖ were understood as gifts of
God which he had imparted by his Spirit (1QS 4:3, 4; 1QSb 5:25) to the faithful members of
the community.
    ―Knowledge‖ (ejpivgnwsi") occurs twice in this intercessory request of Paul (vv 9, 10)
while the cognate verb ―know‖ was used in the thanksgiving as well (v 6). In fact, because
the Colossians had come to know God‘s grace when they were converted (ejpevgnwte is
probably an inceptive aorist), they might now be expected to grow in ―knowledge,‖ or
―perception‖ as Moule (53) puts it.
―Knowledge‖ (ejpivgnwsi") occurs as an important subject of Paul‘s intercessory prayers in
each of the Captivity Epistles (Eph 1:17; Phil 1:9; Philem 6). L. Cerfaux (Christ in the
Theology of St. Paul. Tr G. Webb and A. Walker [New York: Herder, 1959] 402–438,
especially 404) considered that the importance given to knowledge in these letters was due
to its relationship to the ―mystery.‖ This mystery, which was Paul‘s gospel, had its accent
on the salvation of Gentiles. It was in the churches of Asia that Paul became used to
speaking of the gospel as a mystery, Cerfaux claims, and Christians were bound to advance
in a knowledge of it. Such knowledge involved every facet of the Christian‘s life, hence the
prayer that the Colossians might be ―filled‖ with it. In addition to Cerfaux‘s suggestions,
which do not adequately account for the appearance of ―knowledge‖ in the prayers of
Philippians (1:9) and Philemon (v 6), one needs to take note of Paul‘s own personal
circumstances. In prison, aware that he might not be able to visit and strengthen the
churches to which he wrote, he saw the need for them to increase in the knowledge of God
and his will, and with this God‘s mystery, Christ. Also the requirements of the churches
demanded a further exposition of the gospel to combat fresh dangers and heresies that were
arising.
    Paul‘s use of ―knowledge‖ (ejpivgnwsi") here might be by way of contrast with the
much-canvassed gnosis of the false teachers. Heretical gnosis was speculative and
theoretical while the knowledge for which the apostle prayed concerned the ―will of God‖
(qevlhma qeou`; cf. Rom 12:2; Eph 5:17; 1 Thess 4:3; 5:18)—it was comprehensive and
demanded an obedience visible in a person‘s actions. This perception of God‘s will
consisted ―in wisdom and understanding of every sort‖ (the pa`", ―all,‖ applies to both
nouns), while the addition of pneumatikov" (―spiritual‖), in an emphatic position, indicates
that both the wisdom and the understanding are on a spiritual level. As such they stood in
sharp contrast to the wisdom of the false teachers, which at best was only a show (lovgo"
sofiva", 2:23), an empty counterfeit calling itself ―philosophy‖ (filosofiva, 2:8). At the
same time ―spiritual‖ suggests that the full knowledge of God‘s will, for which Paul prays,
comes through the insight God‘s Spirit imparts.
    Later in the letter the apostle will have further things to say about wisdom and
knowledge (ejpivgnwsi" 2:2; 3:10; sofiva 1:28; 2:3, 23; 3:16; 4:5; suvnesi" 2:2). He has
prepared the way, in this intercessory prayer report, for further instruction on knowledge.
At the same time it has been indicated that apart from the activity of God on their behalf
(plhrwqh`te), filling them with true discernment, they would not know as they ought to,
nor grasp what he had to say in the following sections of the epistle. The prayer for
knowledge precedes the exposition of Christ‘s lordship in creation and redemption
(1:15–20), its ramifications (1:21–23) and the detailed interaction with the ―philosophy‖ of
the false teachers (2:6–23).
10. peripath`sai ajxivw" tou` kurivou eij" pa`san ajreskeivan. Although there is perhaps
greater emphasis on knowledge and wisdom in this petitionary prayer than in any other of
Paul‘s letters (though cf. Eph 1:17–19; 3:16–19)—and this includes a strong intellectual
element to enable them to combat error—in true Hebraic fashion it leads to right action and
conduct. The Colossians are ―to walk worthily of the Lord so as to please him in every
way‖ (cf. Percy, Probleme, 126). peripath`sai (―to walk‖) is an infinitive of purpose (this
fits the context better than the suggestions that the infinitive is one of result, or of
explanation), indicating that the knowledge for which Paul prayed was designed to lead to
righteous behavior. Paul often characterizes the life and behavior of the Christian by this
verb ―walk‖ (peripatevw: Gal 5:16; cf. v 25; Rom 6:4; 8:4; 14:15; 2 Cor 4:2; Eph 2:10; 4:1;
5:2, 15; Phil 3:17; etc) and in this he is indebted to the OT (Seesemann, TDNT 5, 944. There
are no parallels in classical Greek). The word is equivalent to the Hebrew /
which is found frequently in the Qumran texts to describe the activity of those who walk in
―the ways of darkness‖ (e.g. 1QS 3:21), or, of those who showing themselves to be true sons
of light walk before God in an upright manner (1QS 1:8). The latter ―walk according to
God‘s will‖ (1QS 5:10; 9:24; cf. Lohse, 27), refusing to please themselves (contrast CD
3:12). The Colossian Christians are to live in a manner that is worthy of the one whom they
confess as Lord.
     In secular Greek ajreskeiva (―pleasing‖) usually signified the behavior by which one
sought to gain a favor, and therefore was most often employed with a negative connotation
meaning ―obsequiousness.‖ However, it could also be used in a positive sense (cf. BAG,
105; Deissmann, Bible Studies, 224; MM, 75), and frequently in Hellenistic Judaism referred
to what was ―well pleasing to God‖ (especially Philo, Spec. Leg. 1.300; cf. Lohse, 27, 28).
The cognate verb ―to please‖ (ajrevskw) is found in Paul‘s letters on fourteen occasions,
with reference to the necessity of pleasing God (or, of pleasing others as a result of one‘s
obedience to God) rather than pleasing oneself (Rom 8:8; 15:1, 2, 3; 1 Cor 7:32; etc cf .
BAG, 105). There is no doubt that in the context of this intercessory prayer, and in the light
of the apostle‘s use ot the cognate verb, ajreskeiva refers to pleasing the Lord (so rightly
Schweizer, 41; against Foerster, TDNT 1, 456, and Lohmeyer, 34)—and that in all things.
     karpoforou`nte" … aujxanovmenoi … dunamouvmenoi … eujcaristou`nte". As
mentioned above the four participles which follow, ―bearing fruit‖ (v 10), ―increasing‖ (v
10), ―being strengthened‖ (v 11) and ―giving thanks‖ (v 12), spell out more precisely what
is involved in ―walking worthily of the Lord.‖ The first two, ―bearing fruit and increasing,‖
recall the words in Paul‘s thanksgiving about the powerful spread of the gospel (no
distinction is intended between the middle voice, karpoforou`menon of v 6 and the active
here). It had borne fruit and spread throughout the whole world particularly at Colossae.
But here in his intercessory prayer the apostle indicates that the words, with a slight change
of meaning (cf. Moule, 51), are applied to the recipients of that gospel as well.
     Some commentators consider that the two participles karpoforou`nte" (―bearing
fruit‖) and aujxanovmenoi (―increasing‖) are to be held together (so Lohmeyer, 35, Beare,
157, Lohse, 29, and Martin, NCB, 52), and related to the source of progress in maturity. On
this view, the bearing of fruit and increasing are effected through the knowledge of God
and they become visible ―in every good work‖ (cf. Schweizer, 42).
     Our preference, however, is to see in the clauses an instance of the verbal arrangement
of chiasmus (abba), so that ejn panti; e[rgw/ ajgaqw/` (―in every good work‖) is to be taken
with karpoforou`nte" (―bearing fruit‖), while th`/ ejpignwvsei tou` qeou` (―in the
knowledge of God‖)—a dative of reference—is joined to aujxanovmenoi (―increasing‖).
Accordingly, Paul is asking God that the fruit of good works might appear in greater
abundance in their lives—and this because of the seed sown in their midst (v 6)—while
they continue to make progress in the knowledge of God. During their pagan days, the
Colossians had expressed their hostility to God by ―doing evil deeds‖ (ejn toi`" e[rgoi"
toi`" ponhroi`", 1:21; cf. 3:7). But now the fruit of good works (ejn panti; e[rgw/ ajgaqw/)
should appear in their behavior (cf. Rom 13:3; 2 Cor 9:8; Gal 6:10; Eph 2:10; 1 Tim 2:10;
5:10; 2 Tim 2:21; etc). Since the participles which define the walking worthily are all in the
present tense and stress the notion of progress, it is probably right to conclude that the
Colossian Christians would receive further knowledge as they were obedient to the
knowledge of God they had already received (Bruce, 186).
Paul‘s language in the intercessory prayer is reminiscent of the interpretation of the parable
of the sower (in its Markan form: 4:1–9, 13–20). If the Sitz im Leben of the parable and its
interpretation were the ministry of Jesus (and the arguments against this do not appear to be
sufficiently weighty), then Paul‘s treatment could be a development of this, on the one hand
applying the words to the gospel which he and his associate Epaphras preached (vv 6, 7),
and on the other hand relating the terms to the recipients of that gospel, at the same time
defining more precisely what was meant by each of the two ideas (on the application of
dynamic verbs to the gospel and its recipients, see O‘Brien, NTS 21 [1974–75] 144–55).
     11. ejn pavsh/ duvnamei dunamouvmenoi ktl. The third clause ―strengthened with all
power …‖ indicates how the conduct, worthy of the Lord, was to be achieved. The
standards set before the Colossians were far higher than those of the false teachers. And
nothing short of God‘s almighty power at work within them would enable them to live so
as to please him in all things.
     Two aspects of God‘s power are stressed by Paul in prayer contexts: first, that in calling
and equipping him as an apostle to the Gentiles (cf. 1 Tim 1:12; 2 Cor 12:9); and secondly,
that power of God which indwelt the Christian community enabling them to walk in a way
that was pleasing to him (cf. Eph 1:18, 19). Here it is the latter which is in view.
     God‘s power is a prominent motif in both Colossians and Ephesians (Col 1:29; 2:12;
Eph 1:19; 3:7, 16, 20; 6:10). Here in his intercession, by heaping up several synonymous
terms, Paul has accented (1) that it is nothing less than God‘s indwelling power which is
required; (2) that ―his glorious might‖ (to; kravto" th`" dovxh" aujtou`; in the LXX kravto"
occurs some fifty times, the overwhelming majority of which are references to the power of
God) is more than adequate for the Colossians‘ needs; and, (3) that this strength will be
provided as the varying circumstances are confronted (dunamouvmenoi; the present
participle denotes the steady accession of strength).
God‘s mighty power will strengthen the community ―for all endurance and long-suffering‖
(eij" pa`san uJpomonh;n kai; makroqumivan), in the face of trials and opposition, uJpomonhv
(―endurance‖; the noun and its cognate verb uJpomevnw can be directed to God and so mean
to ―wait on him,‖ or to the world connoting to ―endure, be steadfast‖) signifies that kind of
perseverance which enables one to hold the position already taken in battle against enemy
attacks from without (Lohse, 30). By this ―endurance‖ the Colossian community will stand
firm in every respect (pa`" goes with both nouns)—especially by holding out against the
pressure of evil forces in the Lycus valley that would lead them astray as well as make
them dispirited. This kind of endurance, however, does not derive from personal bravery or
stoical fortitude. Rather, as in the OT and later Judaism (cf. Lohse, 30), it is seen to spring
from God who is its source (cf. ―the God of steadfastness,‖ oJ qeo;" th`" uJpomonh`", Rom
15:5; this is a wish prayer). Thus he may be petitioned for it (as here; cf. 2 Thess 3:5), or
thanked when it is evident in the lives of believers (1 Thess 1:3; cf. 2 Thess 1:4). At the
same time Christians are summoned to endurance (cf. Rom 8:25; 15:4) and by it they prove
their standing in the faith. With such endurance they persevere through suffering (2 Cor
1:6), as they direct their attention toward the final day (though cf. Martin, NCB, 53).
     ―Long-suffering‖ (makroqumiva) in both Old and New Testaments is used of the
patience of God and of his people–note especially Exodus 34:6, ―The Lord, the Lord, a God
merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness‖
(italics mine). Because of God‘s dealings with his people this word, which was not very
significant in secular Greek, was given a new and unexpectedly profound importance, so
that the human attitude of ―long-suffering‖ (makroqumiva) is now set in a new light. God‘s
patience with his people means they ought to act in a similar manner toward others (cf. the
parable of the wicked servant, Matt 18:23–35, and 1 Thess 5:14). ―Long-suffering‖ is a
fruit of the Spirit (Gal 5:22), unable to be produced from the individual‘s own resources.
    The apostle thus prayed that the believers at Colossae, empowered by God‘s glorious
might, would demonstrate ―all patience and long-suffering‖ in the face of opposition,
thereby showing that they had their hope set on him.
    12–14. As already noted verses 12–14 bring us to the closing section of Paul‘s
petitionary prayer-report rather than introduce a new section, the socalled introit to the
hymn of verses 15–20, in which the community is urged to praise God with a thanksgiving.
It has been argued by Käsemann and others that the language and ideas of verses 12–14,
which were not Pauline, ―hark back … to the language of the LXX and revive many of its
liturgical and cultic formulations‖ (Essays, 154, 155; note Schweizer, 44–50). The words,
according to Käsemann, showed that the setting of the hymn (vv 15–20) was that of a
baptismal liturgy (Bornkamm, Studien, 196, regarded vv 12–14 as the community‘s
confession of faith offered at the eucharist; cf. Dahl, ST 1 [1948] 69–95).
     It is possible that Paul, in his petitionary prayer-report, has selected terms and ideas that
were current in early Christian worship. Käsemann may be right in noting that ―deliver‖
(rJuvesqai), ―transfer‖ (ueqistavnai), ―light‖ (fw`"), ―share‖ (mevri") and ―lot‖ (klh`ro")
were known in a baptismal context (Schweizer, 49, admits this is difficult to prove; he
prefers to call the language of v 12 ―conversion terminology‖). But the remembrance of
being transferred from darkness to light, of receiving redemption and the forgiveness of
sins would have been repeatedly the occasion for joyful thanksgiving. Further, if these
motifs had been used in a baptismal context (and we have no certain means of knowing),
and were in fact pre-Pauline, then it is quite understandable for Paul to remind the readers
of these truths, so as to inculcate joyful thanksgiving to the Father. At the same time we
may suppose that Paul has used these terms and ideas, with their unmistakable OT and
Jewish ring, in his actual prayers for the Colossians. He is, after all, reporting his prayer in
this epistolary style.
12. meta; cara`" eujcaristou`nte" tw`/ patriv. The person to whom the Colossians are to
offer joyful thanksgiving (meta; cara`", ―with joy,‖ is to be taken with eujcaristou`nte",
―giving thanks‖; it preserves the balance of the three clauses in vv 11, 12, and is favored by
Phil 1:4; see O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings, 93, 94, for further details) is ―the
Father‖ (tw`/ patriv). We have already noted at chapter 1:3 in Paul‘s thanksgiving the stress
upon God in his character as Father. The same point is driven home at chapter 3:17, for it is
to the Father that thanksgiving is to be given through the Lord Jesus Christ. Here the Father
is praised because he has effected salvation and redemption in Christ.
     tw`/ iJiJkanwvsanti ktl. The grounds for this joyful thanksgiving are that the Almighty (oJ
iJkanov" is used in the LXX at Job 31:2 as a divine name, ―the Almighty,‖ and C. H. Dodd,
The Bible and the Greeks [London: Hodder, 1935] 15, 16, suggested this OT passage had
influenced Paul here and at 2 Cor 3:6) has fitted (iJkanwvsanti, v 12) them for an eternal
inheritance, delivered (v 13) them from a tyranny of darkness and transferred them into a
kingdom in which his beloved Son holds sway. The aorist tenses point to an eschatology
that is truly realized (i.e. God had already qualified [iJkanwvsanti] the Colossians to share
in the inheritance, he had already delivered [ejrruvsato] them from this alien power and
had already transferred [metevsthsen] them to his Son‘s kingdom), while by contrast, the
present tense of verse 14, ―we have‖ (e[comen), stresses the continued results of the
redemption wrought in the past.
    eij" th;n merivda tou` klhvrou. This whole section, as has been noted, is full of OT
echoes. ―To share in the inheritance of the saints‖ recalls the promise, first given to Abram
(Gen 13:14–17) and subsequently renewed to Israel (Num 26:52–56; 34:2, 13; Josh 19:9)
that they would possess their inheritance as the tribes were apportioned the land of Canaan
by lot. But the inheritance to which Paul refers belongs to a higher plane and a more lasting
order than any earthly Canaan. (On the significance of the land of Canaan in the OT,
Judaism and early Christianity see J. D. Hester, Paul‘s Concept of Inheritance. A
Contribution to the Understanding of Heilsgeschichte [Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1968]
and W. D. Davies, The Gospel and the Land [Berkeley: University of California, 1974]).
―Part, share‖ (meriv") and ―lot‖ (klh`ro") were often used synonymously or together in the
LXX (Deut 10:9; 12:12; 14:27, 29; 18:1; Josh 19:9; Isa 57:6; Jer 13:25), as were their
Hebrew equivalents in the Qumran literature (1QS 11:7, 8; cf. 1QS 2:5; 1QH 11:11, 12; 1QM
1:1, 5; 13:5, 6; cf. E. Lohse, ―Christologie und Ethik im Kolosserbrief,‖ Apophoreta.
Festschrift für Ernst Haenchen, ed. W. Eltester and F. H. Kettler [BZNW 30; Berlin:
Töpelmann, 1964, 157–68] Reprinted in Die Einheit des Neuen Testaments. Exegetische
Studien zur Theologie des Neuen Testaments. 2nd ed. [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und
Ruprecht, 1973] 249–61, esp. 258). Here we understand the phrase eij" th;n merivda tou`
klhvrou as meaning ―to have a share in the klh`ro",‖ i.e. the inheritance of God‘s people (so
Moule, 55, and Bruce, 188). There are parallels in the biblical data (Deut 33:3; Ps 89:6; cf .
1 Thess 3:13) and the Qumran literature (especially 1QS 11:7, 8, where the motifs of
inheritance, lot and holy ones are mentioned) to suggest that ―holy ones‖ (oiJ a{gioi) here
refers to angels, and many commentators take the expression in this way. The further point
is added that the readers have their hope secure in God‘s presence (―in light‖) where the
angels live. Paul, reflecting on his thought in chapter 1:5, is looking forward to a polemic
against the cult of angels, which the false teachers were evidently practicing (2:18). So ―at a
single blow he dispels this veneration of the angelic powers by assuring the Colossians that
they have attained a place shared by the angels (3:1)‖ (Martin, NCB, 54).
    However, this interpretation of ―holy ones‖ referring to angels is less likely than the
view that God‘s people are being spoken about. The closely related passage of Acts 26:18
(the themes of ―light,‖ ―darkness,‖ ―authority,‖ ―forgiveness of sins,‖ ―lot,‖ and ―holy
ones‖ are common to both passages), where words are attributed to Paul, ―those who are
sanctified by faith in me‖ (ejn toi`" hJgiasnevnoi" pivstei fh`/ eij" ejmev), can only refer to
believers. Furthermore, as Schweizer (47) aptly notes all the other references to ―holy ones‖
in this letter (1:2, 4, 22; particularly 1:26; 3:12) are to church members. klh`ro" tw`n aJgivwn
is thus understood as a reference to the inheritance allotted to God‘s people (cf.
Dibelius-Greeven, 8, and many English-speaking commentators). ―In light‖ (ejn tw`/ fwtiv)
goes with the whole phrase that precedes, i.e. ―to share in the inheritance of the saints.‖ The
point is that the inheritance for which the all-powerful Father had fitted them was in the
realm of the light of the age to come. Unlike Canaan it belonged to a spiritual dimension,
unable to be ravaged by war, famine or the like. For the Colossian Christians, most of
whom were probably Gentiles by birth, this was good news indeed. They now had a share
in God‘s inheritance with other believers, or to use the equivalent words of Paul‘s
thanksgiving they had ―a hope laid up in heaven‖ (v 5; cf. 3:1–4).
    13. A further exposition of this remarkable change that God had effected at the time of
the Colossians‘ conversion is spelled out in two corresponding lines (cf. Lohse, 36, and
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 38; see above 19):


o}" ejrruvsato hJma`" ejk th`" ejxousiva" …

kai` metevsthsen eij" th;n basileivan …

Negatively, God has delivered us (hJma`": note the change to the first person plural
indicating that God‘s action has reference to other believers, including Paul, as well as to
the Colossian Christians) from the tyranny of darkness and, positively, he has placed us
under the rule of his beloved Son.
o} ejrruvsato ktl. Deliverance from an alien power was an important theme in the OT (the
Lord rescued his people from the hand of the Egyptians [Exod 14:30; Judg 6:9], from
bondage [Exod 6:6] and from all her enemies [Judg 8:34]). The psalmists in particular
loved to sing of the Lord‘s past deliverances, both national and personal, and on the basis of
these prayed to him that he might deliver them from danger, sickness, death, enemies and
hostile situations (Pss 33:18, 19; 79:9; 86:13; etc). The influence of the Psalter on the later
prayers of Judaism is quite marked (see the  where after the sixth petition for the
forgiveness of sins there follow the words, ―Look upon our affliction and plead our cause,
and redeem us speedily for thy name‘s sake‖; for Qumran parallels note 1QH 2:35; 3:19; cf.
Deichgräber, Gotteshymnus, 80, 81). Most of the NT instances of the verb ―to deliver‖
(rJuvomai) appear in prayer contexts (Luke 1:74; Matt 27:43, the mocking words of the
Jewish leaders to Jesus on the cross that God would not answer his cry for deliverance;
though note 2 Pet 2:7, 9). So the Christian community prays to God ―deliver (rJuvsai) us
from the evil one‖ (Matt 6:13; cf. Luke 11:4) while it awaits its Lord ―who delivers (to;n
rjuovmenon) us from the wrath to come‖ (1 Thess 1:10 in a thanksgiving paragraph
     The inheritance for which the Colossians had been fitted was in the realm of light, a
complete contrast to that tyranny under which they had once lived (hJ ejxousiva tou`
skovtou"; cf. Luke 22:52, 53) prior to their conversion (according to Lohse, 39, the contrast
between the concepts of light and darkness for conversion to the God of Israel was already
known in Hellenistic Judaism [Joseph and Asenath 8:9; 15:12]). Like a mighty king who
was able to remove peoples from their ancestral homes and to transplant them
(metevsthseu; the same verb is used by Josephus [Ant. 9.235] of Tiglath-pileser‘s removal
of the Transjordanian tribes to his own kingdom: metevsthsen eij" th;n auJtou` basileivan;
cf. 1 Cor 13:2 where the verb is used of transferring mountains) into another realm, God
had taken the Colossians from the tyranny of darkness (Chrysostom aptly noted that
―power‖ equals ―tyranny‖ here), where evil powers rule (Luke 22:53) and where Satan‘s
authority is exercised (Acts 26:18), transferring them to the kingdom in which his beloved
Son held sway.
     The notion of two realms to which human beings belong, which are characterized by
the contrast of light and darkness, is found in the Qumran material: on the one side the lot
of Belial and the sons of darkness (1QS 2:5; &1QM; 1:1, 5, 11; 4:2; 13:2), on the other side
the lot of the holy ones and the sons of light (1QS 1:9; 2:16; 11:7, 8; 1QH 11:11, 12).
     This change of dominion so vividly described under the categories of ―light‖ and
―darkness‖ and which had taken place in the lives of the Colossians (together with other
Christians including Paul—―us‖) at their conversion was ―absolutely determinative for the
life of the believer‖ (Lohse, 37; cf. 2 Cor 6:14; Eph 5:8; 1 Peter 2:9). They are now
―children of light‖ (uiJoi; fwtov", 1 Thess 5:5) and are to behave accordingly.
    In the phrase ―the kingdom (basileiva) of his beloved Son‖ we note one of the few
New Testament references to the kingdom of Christ, an interim period between the
resurrection of Jesus and the final coming of the kingdom of God. Paul seems to have
distinguished two aspects of the heavenly kingdom in the phrases ―kingdom of Christ‖ and
―kingdom of God,‖ the former referring to the heavenly kingdom in its present aspect, the
latter concerning the final consummation (1 Cor 6:9, 10; 15:50; Gal 5:21; 2 Tim 4:1, 18;
though some references have a more general significance: e.g. Rom 14:17; 1 Cor 4:20; Col
4:11).
14. ejn w|/ e[comen th;n ajpoluvt rwsin, th;n a[fesin tw`n aJmartiw`n . In the kingdom where
God‘s Son holds sway there is redemption (ajpoluvtrwsi"). This is equated with, or at least
in apposition to, the forgiveness of sins, indicating, as Moule stated, ―very clearly how
entirely moral and spiritual the conception of the kingdom of God or of Christ was for the
disciples of Christ‖ (58). Redemption, which connotes liberation from imprisonment and
bondage, is not simply the object of hope (though cf. Rom 8:23; Eph 1:14; 4:30). It is here
an existing reality, a present possession (reading e[comen, ―we have,‖ which has the
strongest manuscript support; cf. Büchsel, TDNT 4, 353), as often elsewhere in the Pauline
writings (Rom 3:24; 1 Cor 1:30; Eph 1:7), and is ―bound up strictly with the person of
Jesus‖ (Büchsel, TDNT 4, 354). It is ―in him‖ (ejn w|/) that we possess it. God has made him
to be our redemption (1 Cor 1:30; on the subject of redemption see L. Morris, The
Apostolic Preaching of the Cross. 3rd ed. [London: Tyndale, 1965] 11–64: 1st American
edition Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1955; D. Hill, Greek Words and Hebrew Meanings.
Studies in the Semantics of Soteriological Terms [SNTSMS 5; Cambridge: University Press,
1967] 49–81).
    th;n a[fesin tw`n aJmartiw`n. The associated expression ―the forgiveness of sins‖ does
not occur frequently in Paul‘s writings. Normally he refers to ―sin‖ (aJmartiva) in the
singular, as a power which entered the world through Adam‘s action (Rom 5:12) and since
then has tyrannized men until that power was broken by Christ‘s death on the cross (Rom
8:3; etc). ―Forgiveness of sins‖ is mentioned with reference to John‘s baptism (Mark 1:4),
while in the Acts of the Apostles it is repeatedly cited as the content of salvation (Acts
2:38; 5:31; 10:43; 13:38; 26:18). Paul, in this context, may have been using a traditional
expression to describe the blessings of forgiveness given in Christ (though cf. Percy,
Probleme, 85, 86, who claims that this fits the context better than the distinctively Pauline
terms of ―justification,‖ etc). The linking of this motif with redemption may have been due
to the specific problem at Colossae, for it is possible that the false teachers, like those of a
later period to whom Irenaeus referred (Heresies 1.21, 2), distinguished between ―the
remission of sins‖ as the first stage received in baptism and ―redemption‖ as the final stage
coming from the divine Christ (so Bruce, 191, 192). It would be quite understandable why
Paul would show that both were present realities experienced in God‘s Son.
With these words about redemption and the forgiveness of sins Paul‘s prayer shades off
into the majestic hymn about the lordship of Christ.

Explanation
   Having reported his thanksgiving to God for the faith and love of the Colossian
Christians, Paul proceeds to spell out the content of his intercessory prayer for them.
Basically his petition is for the discernment of God‘s will and the power to do it. He
earnestly asks that God might fill the Colossians with a knowledge of his will so that they
would possess true spiritual insight. This should lead to behavior fully pleasing to the
Lord—namely, a crop of good deeds and growth in understanding. The power that would
enable them to live in such a manner exercising patience and long-suffering could only
come from above, that is, from God‘s glorious might. At the same time they are to give
thanks to the Father for his mighty, gracious work in their midst: he has given them an
eternal inheritance, delivered them from the power of darkness and transferred them into a
kingdom where his beloved Son rules. Involved in this also were the blessings of
redemption and the forgiveness of sins.
    Paul‘s introductory thanksgiving paragraph of verses 3–14, of which the intercessory
prayer forms an integral part, has a fourfold function:
(a) epistolary—it introduces major themes of the letter such as the universal spread of
God‘s word, the gospel (in contrast to the limited circle of the Colossian heresy), the
Christian hope, true wisdom and knowledge with a resulting behavior that pleases the Lord
(in contrast to the false wisdom of the heretical teachers with its rigorous asceticism and
show of humility), thanksgiving to the Father, deliverance from bondage, and so on. These
themes are then expanded, sometimes by way of answer to the heresy, in the body of the
letter. Stylistic features are foreshadowed in the passage, while the degree of intimacy of
the letter can also be observed here. Paul does not know this church personally, and so does
not write in the warm manner of the Philippian letter, for example.
    (b) The didactic purpose is clearly in evidence. Important theological motifs occur in
both the thanksgiving and the intercessory prayer, e.g. faith, love, hope, gospel, knowledge,
God‘s will, wisdom and understanding, etc It was the apostle‘s concern that these themes
be fully grasped by the recipients, and he has expanded them in the body of the letter, so
recalling the readers to truths already taught by Epaphras.
    (c) The exhortatory function is also to be noted. Catechetical references to
long-suffering (3:12; cf. 1:11), the putting on of love (3:14; cf. 1:4), the corporate giving of
thanks to the Father (3:15–17; cf. 1:12), walking in the tradition they had received (2:6; cf.
1:10) and so behaving wisely to those ―outside‖ (4:5) are prefigured in this introductory
passage. At the same time the Colossians, knowing that Paul was interceding for them
along the lines that he did, would have been encouraged to respond in the appropriate way.
(d) Finally, Paul, by his actual prayers and the recording of them (even if the reports are
summaries of the prayers offered to God), demonstrated his pastoral concern for the
readers. He desired that they might grow in spiritual knowledge in order to combat the
dangers facing them. Such wisdom could only come from above, and we may suggest that
Paul recognized that, apart from God‘s granting such insight, his teaching and exhortation
in the words which were to follow would be of no avail.




Christ the Lord in Creation and Redemption
(1:15–20)
Bibliography
    The following is a select list of works chosen from the vast amount of secondary literature
written on verses 15–20. Further bibliographical references will be found in these and other works
noted at the relevant exegetical points. Commentaries which have not been included are listed.
Aletti, J. N. Colossiens 1, 15–20. Genre et exégèse du texte Fonction de la thématique sapientelle.
AnBib 91. Rome: Biblical Institute, 1981. Benoit, P. ―L‘hymne christologique de Col 1, 15–20.
Jugement critique sur l‘état des recherches.‖ Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-Roman Cults.
Studies for Morton Smith at Sixty, ed. J. Neusner. Part One. New Testament. SJLA 12. Leiden: Brill,
1975, 226–63. Best, E. One Body in Christ. A Study in the Relationship of the Church to Christ in
the Epistles of the Apostle Paul. London: SPCK, 1955. Burger, C. Schöpfung und Versöhnung.
Studien zum liturgischen Gut im Kolosser-und Epheserbrief. WMANT 46. Neukirchen:
Neukirchener, 1975. Burney, C. F. ―Christ as the APXH of Creation.‖ JTS 27 (1926) 160–77.
Deichgräber, R. Gotteshymnus. Ernst, J. Pleroma und Pleroma Christi. Geschichte und Deutung
eines Begriffs der paulinischen Antilegomena. BU 5. Regensburg: Pustet, 1970. Feuillet, A. Le
Christ sagesse de Dieu d‘après les épîtres pauliniennes. Paris: Gabalda, 1966. Gabathuler, H. J.
Jesus Christus. Haupt der Kirche-Haupt der Welt. Der Christushymnus Colosser 1, 15–20 in der
theologischen Forschung der letzten 130 Jahre. ATANT 45. Zurich: Zwingli, 1965. Gibbs, J. G.
Creation and Redemption. A Study in Pauline Theology. NovTSup 26. Leiden: Brill, 1971.
Hegermann, H. Die Vorstellung vom Schöpfungsmittler im hellenistischen Judentum und
Urchristentum. TU 82 Berlin: Akademie, 1961. Jervell, J. Imago Dei. Gen 1, 26f im Spätjudentum,
in der Gnosis und in den paulinischen Briefen. FRLANT 76. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und
Ruprecht, 1960. Käsemann, E. ―A Primitive Christian Baptismal Liturgy.‖ Essays, 149–68. Kehl,
N. Der Christushymnus im Kolosserbrief. Eine motivgeschichtliche Untersuchung zu Kol 1, 12–20.
SBM 1. Stuttgart: Katholisches Bibelwerk, 1967. Kim, S. An Exposition of Paul‘s Gospel in the
Light of the Damascus Christophany. An Investigation into the Origin of Paul‘s Gospel. University
of Manchester: Unpublished Ph.D thesis, 1977. Lähnemann, J. Kolosserbrief. Lyonnet, S.
―L‘hymne christologique de l‘Epître aux Colossiens et la fête juive du Nouvel An.‖ RSR 48 (1960)
92–100. McCown, W. ―The Hymnic Structure of Colossians 1:15–20.‖ EvQ 51 (1979) 156–62.
Martin, R. P. ―An Early Christian Hymn (Col. 1:15–20).‖ EvQ 36 (1964) 195–205. Michl, J. ―Die
‗Versöhnung‘ (Kol 1, 20).‖ TQ 128 (1948) 442–62. Münderlein, G. ―Die Erwählung durch das
Pleroma. Bemerkungen zu Kol. i.19.‖ NTS 8 (1961–62) 264–76.Norden, E. Agnostos Theos.
Untersuchungen zur Formengeschichte religiöser Rede. 4th ed. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1956. O’Brien, P. T. ―Col. 1:20 and the Reconciliation of all Things.‖ RTR 33
(1974) 45–53. O’Neill, J. C. ―The Source of the Christology in Colossians.‖ NTS 26 (1979–80)
87–100. Overfield, P. D. ―Pleroma: A Study in Content and Context.‖ NTS 25 (1978–79) 384–96.
Pöhlmann, W. ―Die hymnischen All-Prädikation in Kol 1:15–20.‖ ZNW 64 (1973) 53–74. Sanders,
J. T. The New Testament Christological Hymns Their Historical Religious Background. SNTSMS
15. Cambridge: University Press, 1971. Schnackenburg, R. ―Die Aufnahme des Christushymnus
durch den Verfasser des Kolosserbriefes.‖ EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1. Neukirchen/Zurich:
Neukirchener/Benziger, 1969, 33–50. Schweizer, E. ―Die Kirche als Leib Christi in den
paulinischen Antilegomena.‖ TLZ 86 (1961) 241–56. Reprinted in Neotestamentica. Deutsche und
englische Aufsätze, 1951–1963. Zurich: Zwingli, 1963, 293–316. ———. ―Kolosser 1, 15–20.‖
EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1. Neukirchen/Zurich: Neukirchener/Benziger, 1969, 7–31. Reprinted in
Beiträge zur Theologie des Neuen Testaments. Neutestamentliche Aufsätze (1955–1970). Zurich:
Zwingli, 1970, 113–45. ———. ThBer 5 (1976) 163–191. ———. ―Versöhnung des Alls. Kol 1,
20.‖ Jesus Christus in Historie und Theologie. Neutestamentliche Festschrift für Hans Conzelmann
zum 60. Geburtstag, ed.. G. Strecker. Tübingen: Mohr, 1975, 487–501. Vawter, B. ―The Colossians
Hymn and the Principle of Redaction.‖ CBQ 33 (1971) 62–81. Vögtle, A. Das Neue Testament und
die Zukunft des Kosmos. Düsseldorf: Patmos, 1970. Wengst, K. Christologische Formeln und
Lieder des Urchristentums. 2nd ed.. SNT 7. Gütersloh: Mohn, 1972. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene.

Translation
      15. He is the image of the invisible God,
          The firstborn over all creation,
      16. For in him all things were created,
              In heaven and on earth,
              Things visible and invisible,
              Whether thrones or dominions, principalities or powers,
              All things were created through him and for him;
      17. And he is before all things,
              And in him all things hold together.
      18. And he is the head of the body, the church.
      He is the beginning,
          The firstborn from the dead,
              In order that he might be pre-eminent in everything,
      19. For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell,
      20. And through him to reconcile all things to him,
              Whether things on earth or in heaven,
By making peace through his blood shed on the cross.

Form/Structure/Setting

1. Literary Form
The weight of NT scholarly opinion today considers that Colossians 1:15–20 is a
pre-Pauline ―hymn‖ inserted into the letter‘s train of thought by the author. The preceding
verses (12–14) are said to preserve the style of a confession (see above 19, 20) with its first
person plurals (―we‖ and ―us‖), while the hymn itself makes no reference to the confessing
community (all personal references are absent). Instead it asserts in exalted language the
supremacy of Christ in creation and redemption. The immediately following words (vv
21–23) use the language of direct speech to apply themes from the hymn, especially that of
reconciliation, to the Colossian community.
    In describing the passage in this way it should be noted that the term ―hymn‖ is not
employed in the modern sense of what we understand by congregational hymns with
metrical verses. Nor are we to think in terms of Greek poetic form. The category is used
broadly, similar to that of ―creed,‖ and includes dogmatic, confessional, liturgical,
polemical or doxological material (cf. Schweizer, 51, following Benoit, Christianity, 230,
231). The criteria are twofold: (a) stylistic—―a certain rhythmical lilt ascertainable when
the passage is read aloud, a correspondence between words and phrases which are placed in
the sentences in an obviously carefully selected position … the use of parallelismus
membrorum (i.e. an arrangement into couplets); and traces of a rudimentary metre and the
employment of rhetorical devices such as homoeoteleuton, alliteration, antithesis and
chiasmus‖ (R. P. Martin, Carmen Christi. Philippians ii. 5–11 in Recent Interpretation and
in the Setting of Early Christian Worship SNTSMS 4; Cambridge: University Press, 1967)
12, 13, and (b) linguistic—an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological
terms, which is different from the language of the surrounding context (see R. P. Martin,
―Aspects of Worship in the New Testament Church,‖ Vox Evangelica 2 [1963] 6–32,
especially 16–21, following the tests suggested by Stauffer; cf. Sanders, Hymns, 1–5).
    So the presence of introductory relative clauses (o{" ejstin, vv 15, 18), the positioning
of words in such a way that lines and strophes may be arranged, chiasmus and inclusio, and
unusual terms (which either do not appear elsewhere in the Pauline corpus or are used with
a different meaning), are considered by the majority view as grounds for regarding this as a
traditional hymnic piece.
    Norden (Agnostos Theos, 25–54; cf. Gabathuler, Jesus Christus, 21–26) was the first
scholar in recent times to subject the paragraph to a comprehensive form critical analysis
and he sought to find in these verses ―undoubtedly old traditional material‖ which he
considered came originally from Jewish circles influenced by Greek ideas. Evidence of the
latter was a Stoic ―all‖-formula (cf. 1:16, 17) and in a Platonic-type division of the cosmos
into ―things seen and things unseen.‖ He noted two strophes or stanzas of unequal length
(vv 15–18a and 18b–20). The first, beginning with ―who is‖ (o{" ejstin) of verse 15, treats
the theme of Christ and creation, while the second, commencing with the same striking
relative clause ―who is‖ in verse 18, refers to Christ and the church. The term ―firstborn‖
(prwtovtoko") occurs in both stanzas (vv 15 and 18).
Since Norden‘s time continental scholars, in particular, have sought to determine the
precise structure of this so-called hymnic paragraph. So, for example, Lohmeyer (40–68; cf.
Gabathuler, Jesus Christus, 29–39), who described verses 13–29 as ―the order of a
primitive Christian worship service,‖ which opened with a thanksgiving prayer (v 12), saw
the hymn consisting of two strophes, each in seven lines (1:15–16a, 1:18–20) which were
connected by a section of three lines (1:16f–17).
    Käsemann (Essays, 149–68; cf. Gabathuler, Jesus Christus, 49–61) thought that the
passage consisted of two strophes each with six lines (1:15–16, 1:18b–20), which were
connected by 1:17–18a. But he, like many others since (see the lists in Benoit, Christianity,
238) regarded the words ―the church‖ (th`"jekklhsiva") of verse 18a together with those of
verse 20b, ―through the blood of his cross‖ (dia; tou` ai{mato" tou` staurou` aujtou`), as
interpolations (for an assessment of Käsemann‘s presentation with special reference to his
proposed origin of the hymn see 37, 38). According to Masson (104–107; cf. Gabathuler,
Jesus Christus, 42–49) the parallelism was more Semitic than Greek and he sought to
arrange the text in five strophes of four lines each on a supposed metrical basis (vv 15–16b,
16c–f, 17–18, 19–20b, 20c–f).
    J. M. Robinson (―A Formal Analysis of Colossians 1:15–20, ‖ JBL 76 [1957] 270–87; cf.
Gabathuler, Jesus Christus, 80–88; R. G. Hamerton-Kelly, Pre-Existence, Wisdom and the
Son of Man [SNTSMS 21; Cambridge: University Press, 1973] 168–74) saw a close
correspondence between the two stanzas with matching phrases and terms. However, to
achieve this symmetry he has to delete from the existing text a number of phrases (the last
clause of v 18 has been moved to the end of the second strophe, the first clause of the same
verse loses its reference to the church, and the list of heavenly powers in v 16 is dropped).
Robinson then reconstructs a hypothetical first draft of the hymn which the author of the
epistle has taken over and supplemented, at the same time reinterpreting the meaning of the
words.
    E. Bammel (―Versuch zu Col 1:15–20, ‖ ZNW 52 [1961] 88–95; cf. Gabathuler, Jesus
Christus, 118–21) contended that the hymn consisted of two strophes, each containing an
elaborate chiastic parallelism and being introduced by ―who is‖ (o{" ejstin). However, his
interpretation does not give sufficient emphasis to the parallel occurrence of ―he is‖ (aujtov"
ejstin) in verses 17 and 18. In addition, verses 17, 18a and 20 which contain teaching vital
to the hymn are left unattached to the main structure (cf. Martin, NCB, 64).
Important and influential contributions to this ongoing debate (it is not possible in the brief
compass of this note to examine all recent works on vv 15–20) have been made by
Schweizer (note the bibliographical references to his writings in his recent commentary,
44–74). Observing the formal parallelism between verses 15 and 18 (―he is,‖ o{" ejstin, and
―firstborn,‖ prwtovtoko"), the repetition of ―because in him‖ (o{ti ejn aujtw`/, vv 16 and 19)
and ―all things through him‖ (ta; pavnta diÆ aujtou`, vv 16 and 20), Schweizer arranged the
hymn into two strophes (vv 15, 16 and 18b–20) between which stood a middle strophe
(Zwischenstrophe) or stanza (vv 17–18a) that acted as a bridge (cf. Lähnemann,
Kolosserbrief, 38). The first stanza consisted of three lines in which the cosmic Christ is
praised as the Lord of creation, the One who brought the universe into existence and who
directs its destiny. The middle stanza partly repeats the thought of Christ‘s preexistent
activity and then proceeds to assert that he is the unifying principle which holds the
universe together. The final strophe praises this cosmic Lord who embodies the divine
―fullness‖ (plhvrwma). As the risen One, he is God‘s agent in bringing the universe into
harmony with God‘s purposes through reconciliation.
    To secure an original hymn of perfect symmetry, with each stanza consisting of three
lines and having a discernible rhythmical pattern, Schweizer omitted four phrases. These
comments (v 16, ―thrones or dominions or principalities or authorities‖; v 18, ―the church‖;
v 18, ―that in everything he may be pre-eminent‖; and v 20, ―making peace by the blood of
his cross‖) which exceed the rhythmical order and parallelism of the original hymn are,
according to Schweizer, the author‘s own additions to a composition that was already in
circulation prior to his writing the letter. He has thus corrected the theology of the hymn,
for, with the exception of the first, these additions disagree with the theological conceptions
of the original composition: at verse 16 ―thrones or dominions or principalities or
authorities‖ is a clarification of the statement, ―all things in heaven and on earth,‖ relating it
to a special issue the letter addresses itself to, namely the subordination of all heavenly
powers to Christ. The additional words of verse 18, ―the church,‖ reinterpret the hymn so as
to rebut the false idea that Christ‘s body is to be identified with the world or that
redemption was a merely physical or super-physical event. The third comment, ―that in
everything he might be pre-eminent,‖ verse 18, is another reinterpretation in a Pauline
sense, while in verse 20 the notion of reconciliation is corrected to that of making peace, i.e.
pacification in the sense Roman emperors understood it. Finally, into a theology that
focused exclusively on resurrection and exaltation the author introduces the Pauline stress
on the cross as the reconciling act of Christ (v 20).
In spite of the increasing acceptance within certain circles of this reconstruction there seem
to be considerable difficulties in the opinion of the present writer. If the author of
Colossians made corrections to the hymn, as Schweizer has suggested, then why did he
allow certain elements which were different from his own theology to remain? If
reconciliation and pacification (v 20), to take but one example, are essentially different,
why did he not remove the idea which did not fit in with his own view, especially as the
formal structure of the hymn had been ―ruined‖ anyway? To remove the so-called intruding
elements ought not to have been difficult for the author of Colossians. Further, why is it
necessary to consider ―reconciliation‖ and ―making peace‖ (including the notion of
pacification) as essentially different (cf. Schweizer, Neotestamentica, 326)? In our
judgment a more adequate exegesis can be given (see 55–57). But these questions only
serve to raise the more general issue as to whether one can reasonably attempt to discover
the original form of the hymn anyway. Lohse, 44, for example, has criticized the
reconstructions of Robinson, Bammel and Schweizer on the grounds that: (a) their
alterations meddle too much with the given text; (b) they have not provided sufficient
evidence to make probable the hypothesis of two stanzas of exactly parallel structures
(Schweizer‘s division of a middle strophe has been criticized on the grounds that v 16c with
its e[ktistai belongs to the preceding strophe as part of an inclusio; so Kehl,
Christushymnus, 43, 44, and cf. Schnackenburg, EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1, 35); while (c) most
of the phrases which are considered to be additions to an earlier shorter hymn are in fact
statements which expand the meaning of the lines already plotted (cf. Pöhlmann‘s
comments, ZNW 64 [1973] 53–74, with reference to the ―all‖-formula). Gabathuler (Jesus
Christus, 125–31), at the end of his study on the history of research into chapter 1:15–20,
concluded that there was still considerable uncertainty about the stylistic criteria. For
example, when criteria of form and content differ, which take precedence? Or when
different formal criteria lead to different results, which stylistic tests are to be followed?
     In spite of the considerable amount of scholarly work carried out since Gabathuler‘s
researches were published (1965), no consensus has been reached about the number and
content of the stanzas in verses 15–20, or about possible Pauline or post-Pauline additions
(cf. M. Wolter, Rechtfertigung und zukünftiges Heil. Untersuchungen zu Röm 5, 1–11,
[BNZW 43; Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1978] 49; note the variations, and these do not
include all possibilities, listed by Benoit, Christianity, 238). Even Lohse‘s conservative
reconstruction (44, 45) with its two stanzas of unequal length which do not correspond to
each other in all their details suggests, on stylistic grounds, that the latter strophe begins
with the words of verse 18b, ―He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead‖ (o{" ejstin
ajrchv, prwtovtoko" ejk tw`n nekrw`n), so paralleling the opening statements of verse 15,
―He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation‖ (o{" ejstin eijkwvn …,
prwtovtoko" pavsh" ktivsew"). On this view the assertion of verse 18a, ―He is the head of
the body,‖ forms a fitting climax to the first part of the poem (or at least the middle stanza)
and refers to Christ‘s headship over the entire cosmos. But as the text stands this statement
is a soteriological one. It is not certain that the words, ―the church‖ (th`" ejkklhsiva"),
belonged to the original hymn; and although most recent writers regard the words as a
redactional addition Kehl (Christushymnus, 93, 97), Hegermann (Schöpfungsmittler, 106)
and Gibbs (Creation, 105; cf. Feuillet, Christ, 217–28) have argued that they are essential
to the meaning of verse 18a.
     No single reconstruction is completely convincing. Kümmel‘s comment (Introduction,
343) is worth quoting at length:
   … the numerous reconstructions of the hymn expanded by the author that have been
   undertaken since Lohmeyer‘s analysis have scarcely led to a really convincing result.
   Indeed, the assumption is not yet proved that a hymn constructed according to a strict
   scheme has been used and that accordingly every fragment of a sentence beyond the scheme
   must stem from the author of Col. What is far more likely is that the author of Col himself
    [whom Kümmel regards as Paul] has formed the hymn, utilizing traditional material …

    (This is essentially the position of Dibelius-Greeven, Moule, Maurer and Feuillet, etc)
    It seems, therefore, better to speak of certain parallels, observed originally by Norden
(note the subsequent treatments by Kehl, Christushymnus, 30–34, and Zeilinger, Der
Erstgeborene, 39–43). So o{" ejstin eijkwvn (―he is the image,‖ v 15) corresponds to o}"
ejstin ajrchv (―he is the beginning,‖ v 18); prwtovtokospavsh" ktivsew" (―firstborn of all
creation,‖ v 15) is parallel to prwtovtoko" ejktw`n nekrw`n (―firstborn from the dead,‖ v 18),
while each of the relative clauses in turn is followed by a causal clause beginning with o{ti
(―because‖): o{ti eJn aujtw`/ ejtivsqh (―because in him all things were created,‖ v 16) and o{ti
ejn aujtw`/ eujdovkhsen (―because in him … was pleased,‖ v 19). The cosmic dimensions of
Christ‘s rule round out verse 16, ei[te qrovnoi ei[te kuriovthte" ei[te ajrcai; ei[te
ejxousivai (―whether thrones or dominions, principalities or powers‖), and verse 20, ei[te
ta; ejpi; th`" gh`" ei[te ta; ejn toi`" oujranoi`" (―whether things on earth or in the heavens‖).
One may note the frequent use of pa`" (―all‖) and the formal chiasmus in verses 16c and 20:


a tav pavnta (―all things‖)
b kaiv di` aujtou` (―and through him‖)

b di` aujtou` kaiv (―through him and‖)
a ta; pavnta (―all things‖).

    In verse 16 two examples of chiasmus occur. In the first, two lines are constructed
chiastically in synonymous parallelism:


o{ti ej aijtw`/ ejktivsh tav pavnta

ta; pavnta di` aujtou` kai; eij" aujto;n e{ktistai

―For in him all things were created

All things were created through him and for him.‖

   In the second instance ta; pavnta (―all things‖) is expanded and made more explicit
with the words:


ejn toi`" oujranoi`" kai; ejpi; th`" lh`"

ta; oJrata; kai; ta; ajovrata

―In the heavens and on earth,

things visible and invisible.‖
    It has also been suggested that the repeated ta; pavnta (―all things‖) and the verb
e[ktistai (―created‖) of the concluding line is an example of inclusio which binds the
second chiasmus together.
    Finally, the formal correspondence between verses 17 and 18 needs to be noted:


17
kai; aujtov" ejstin pro; pavntwn

18
kai; aijtov" ejstin hJ kefalhv


―And he is before all things …


And he is th
2. BACKGROUND
     The possible backgrounds to these verses suggested by scholars have been remarkably
varied. The following suggestions have been the most influential (cf. R. P. Martin,
Colossians: The Church‘s Lord and the Christian‘s Liberty [Exeter: Grand Rapids, MI:
1972]; 1982 reprint, Palm Springs, CA 40–44):
(a) Käsemann (Essays, 149–68) thought that once the additions ―the church‖ (th`"
ejkklhsiva", v 18) and ―through the blood of his cross‖ (dia; tou` ai{mato" tou` staurou`
aujou`, v 20), a mere eight words out of 112, were removed the hymn no longer displayed
any specifically Christian characteristics. Originally it was a pre-Christian Gnostic text
which dealt with the metaphysical and supra-historical drama of the Gnostic Redeemer.
The hymn was taken over in Christian usage in a baptismal liturgical reinterpretation
(integral to Käsemann‘s argument is the view that vv 12–14 were known in a pre-Pauline
baptismal context and served as an ―introit‖ to the hymn; for a critique of this see 19, 20)
and finally cited by the author of Colossians in a refutation (!) of the Gnostic
counter-movement at Colossae. For Käsemann creation and redemption were related
constituents in the myth of the primeval man and Redeemer. He broke into the sphere of
death as the pathfinder for those who belong to him. The purpose of the Redeemer‘s
incarnation was to achieve an objective reconciliation—a reconciliation of the whole
universe, i.e. of all the aeons that make up the cosmos. Such pacification (v 20) is neither
personal nor moral. Instead, it constitutes a recognition on the part of these cosmic forces
that the one aeon is Lord. The conflicting elements are pacified and the Redeemer
announces universal peace.
     Yet Käsemann‘s thesis is unconvincing for the following reasons: first, apart from his
treatment of the strophes on stylistic grounds which is doubtful (note Gabathuler‘s
criticisms, Jesus Christus, 52) even if it could be argued satisfactorily that the phrases in
verses 18 and 20 were additions, there is the complex issue as to whether a Gnostic
redemption saga has any bearing on our understanding of the New Testament message, and
the legitimacy of appealing to second century documents for support. Second, several terms
in the paragraph have an Old Testament ring about them, for example, the repeated
references to the divine creation (vv 15, 16) and the verb eujdokevw (―be pleased,‖ v 19) used
in the OT of God‘s electing decree (Lohse, 45; see the exegesis below). Third, Schweizer
and Lohse have correctly pointed out that the Christian character of the phrase prwtovtoko"
ejk tw`n nekrw`n (―the firstborn from among the dead,‖ v 18) cannot be doubted. Indeed, the
former contends that Käsemann‘s thesis of a pre-Christian hymn is ―wrecked‖ by this
phrase (Schweizer, Neotestamentica, 297, who is followed by Lohse, 45, and Pöhlmann,
ZNW 64 [1973] 54; note especially the treatment of Kehl, Christushymnus, 88–93). The
fourth and perhaps main criticism leveled against Käsemann‘s theory concerns the teaching
about reconciliation. It is doubtful whether there is any non-Christian parallel to the
Redeemer who comes to earth and unites God and man. Schweizer (Neotestamentica, 297)
and others (cf. Pöhlmann, ZNW 64 [1973] 54, who consider that the attempt to find a
pre-Christian original form of the hymn has now been given up by scholars) regard this as a
distinctively Christian motif (the references in Codex V of the Nag Hammadi texts and the
Apoc Adam which are thought to present an example of a redemption myth unaffected by
the Christian story of Jesus are disputed as to their significance, cf. R. McL. Wilson, Gnosis
and the New Testament [Oxford: Blackwell, 1968] 138, 139; American edition
[Philadelphia: Fortress]).
(b) The second approach is to understand the hymn‘s religious message against the
background of Rabbinic Judaism. Burney (JTS 27 [1926] 160–77) and W. D. Davies (Paul
and Rabbinic Judaism. Some Rabbinic Elements in Pauline Theology. 2nd ed. London:
SPCK, 1955, 150–52; 4th American edition [Philadelphia: Fortress, 1980] have been the
chief exponents of this view. The former drew attention to the many similarities between
the hymn and OT passages, particularly Proverbs 8 and Genesis 1 as interpreted by the
rabbis with reference to Wisdom. Paul is thought to have given a meditative exposition on
the opening words of the Bible (), in which every possible meaning the rabbis were
used to extracting from Genesis 1:1 (―in the beginning God created‖) and Proverbs 8:22
(―the Lord begat me in the beginning [] of his way‖) was said to apply to the church‘s
Lord. Thus, the need to call in extraneous, Hellenistic sources to explain the passage would
be reduced if Burney‘s thesis is correct.
    Although this approach has been criticized for assuming that Paul‘s opposition at
Colossae sprang solely from a Jewish source (cf. Gabathuler, Jesus Christus, 28, 29) and
that the theory is too ingenious (would a predominantly Gentile church have understood
rabbinic methods of interpretation?), several positive points emerge. First, Burney and
Davies are right in underlining the importance of the OT statements about creation as a
background to the hymnic piece. Second, the significance attached to the Wisdom tradition
in which Wisdom‘s function in creation is understood in Colossians 1:15–18 as being
transferred to Christ is a point accepted by exegetes who have preferred to seek the
background to the paragraph in Hellenistic Judaism (Pöhlmann, ZNW 64 [1973] 73, has
shown that although the ―all‖-formula was frequently used in many prayer texts of the
ancient world it did not appear often in the prayer traditions of early Rabbinic Judaism). So
although Burney‘s detailed argument may be open to question, his drawing attention to OT
parallels which clearly lie close at hand—rather than some uncertain parallels which have
been claimed in Gnosticism, Stoicism and elsewhere—is commendable.
    (c) The third general approach considers the background to Colossians 1:15–20 is to be
sought in Hellenistic Judaism. This is the view of many continental scholars, especially
Schweizer whose writings on this theme have been influential (cf. the references in his
commentary, 44–74). The approach seeks to take seriously the character of the church as
predominantly Gentile Christian and recognizes that the Jewish elements in the heresy
which troubled the Colossians stemmed from the Dispersion. Schweizer considers that
Colossians 1:15–20 may be part of a wider indebtedness of NT Christology to a type of
Hellenistic Jewish speculation in which a central place was given to the Wisdom of God.
The theology of the Christian group that created the hymn can be clearly seen from the
many parallels to it found in the Wisdom literature. Christ is depicted as the pre-existent
Mediator of creation and the One who holds together the cosmos, preserving the world
from dissolution. The new point, made by the group which created the hymn, is that: ―In
Christ heaven and earth are reconciled again‖ (Neotestamentica, 325).
According to Schweizer the author of Colossians corrected the theology of the hymn in two
ways: first, by inserting into the passage four additional comments (noted above in the
section dealing with the literary form); second, in his commentary which follows (1:21–23)
the author stressed that it is mankind, not nature, that is reconciled—and this through
Christ‘s death on the cross.
    We have already drawn attention to some of the considerable problems associated with
Schweizer‘s suggestions about the author‘s ―corrections‖ to the hymn (note
Schnackenburg‘s pertinent question about additions or corrections, EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1,
37). It seems very unusual that the writer should allow certain elements which were
different from his own theology to remain after he had corrected the hymn. Further, it is not
at all certain that the author has varied the hymn‘s theology in the commentary immediately
following the passage (1:21–23). In our judgment a more adequate explanation is possible
(see the exegesis below). But Schweizer‘s point regarding the indebtedness of NT
Christology to a general ―Wisdom‖ background in Hellenistic Judaism may be correct,
provided we keep in mind the following points: (i) a sharp distinction between Palestinian
and Hellenistic Judaism, later reflected in the early church, can hardly be sustained in the
light of recent research. Although this distinction has been axiomatic in some NT scholarly
circles it has been rightly questioned by I. H. Marshall (―Palestinian and Hellenistic
Christianity: Some Critical Comments,‖ NTS 19 [1972–73] 271–87) and M. Hengel (in his
magisterial work, Judaism and Hellenism. Studies in their Encounter in Palestine during
the Early Hellenistic Period, Tr J. Bowden [Philadelphia: Fortress, 1974]).
    (ii) While the predicates of and activities ascribed to Wisdom in Hellenistic Judaism are
akin to several of the statements made about Christ in Colossians 1:15–20 (see the detailed
exegetical comments below) the differences ought not to be overlooked. There is, for
example, no parallel in Jewish Wisdom literature (or in the rest of the extant Jewish
materials for that matter) to the statement about Christ as the goal of creation: ―all things
have been created through him and for him (eij" aujtovn),‖ verse 16.
    (iii) Further, while the statements about Wisdom—as the ―image,‖ ―firstborn,‖ etc, and
the one through whom the universe was created—are understood in a quasi-personal way
within the framework of Hellenistic Judaism, the one spoken of in our paragraph of
Colossians is the living person, Jesus Christ, whom Paul had met face to face on the
Damascus road. To the early Christians, as to Paul, Jesus Christ was the incarnate Wisdom
of God.
If we suppose that the passage (along with several others in the N T: cf. Heb 1:1–4; John
1:1–18) gives evidence of an indebtedness to a general Wisdom background in the O T and
Judaism, we still have to bear in mind that these predicates and activities ascribed to
Wisdom came to be applied to Jesus of Nazareth, recently crucified and risen from the
dead. How did this come about? The early Christians may have had the thought-forms
provided by this Wisdom background but the application of these to Jesus Christ is still not
explained by the background itself.
3. AUTHORSHIP
From what has already been written above, it is clear that the majority of recent writers
think that the hymnic passage of chapter 1:15–20 is non-Pauline. (A minority including
Lohmeyer, Percy, Dibelius, Maurer, Moule, Bruce, Feuillet, Kümmel and Caird take the
paragraph to be Pauline.)
    Two main arguments are advanced against the Pauline authorship of the hymn: first, a
significant number of terms which do not appear elsewhere in the Pauline corpus, or which
are used with a different meaning, turn up in the hymn (Lohse, 42, and Deichgräber,
Gotteshymnus, 152, 153). So the Christological predicate eijkw;n tou` qeou` (―image of
God,‖ v 15) occurs only in a formula-type sentence in 2 Corinthians 4:4. oJratov" (―visible,‖
v 16) is used only here in the NT while ojovrato" (―invisible,‖ vv 15, 16) is unusual (Rom
1:20; 1 Tim 1:17; Heb 11:27) and is never employed in contrast to oJratov" (―visible‖).
qrovnoi (―thrones,‖ v 16) appears nowhere else in Paul while kuriovth" (―dominion,‖ v 16)
turns up only once more (Eph 1:21). The intransitive form of sunivsthmi (―be established,‖
v 17) is otherwise not used by Paul. In a Christological context Paul refers to Christ as
ajparachv (―firstfruits,‖ 1 Cor 15:20) but never as ajrchv (―beginning,‖ v 18). prwteuvw
(―preeminent,‖ v 18) and eijrhnopoievw (―make peace,‖ v 20) are hapax legomena in the NT.
The verb katoikevw (―dwell,‖ v 19) appears again only in Colossians 2:9 (which refers back
to the hymn) and Ephesians 3:17, while ajpokatallavssw (―reconcile,‖ v 20) only in
Ephesians 2:16. Paul mentions the ―blood of Christ‖ (v 20) only where he takes over
traditional Christian expressions (Rom 3:25; 5:9; 1 Cor 10:16; 11:25, 27; cf. also Eph 1:7;
2:13), while the combination ai|ma tou` staurou` au`tou` (―blood of his cross,‖ v 20) is
without parallel.
    But these observations do not present a convincing case against the Pauline authorship
of verses 15–20 (note the critique of Kim, Paul‘s Gospel, 183–87). That the Christological
predicate eijkwvn tou` qeou` (―image of God‖) appears only in a formulalike sentence in 2
Corinthians 4:4 proves nothing (against Jervell‘s circular argument, Imago, 196, 197, 209;
and Deichgräber, Gotteshymnus, 152, 153, who by asserting that eijkwvn and prwtovtoko"
are pre-Pauline and pre-Christian fails to ask who applied them to Christ for the first time:
Paul or someone else before him? No one denies that eijkw;n tou` qeou`, for example, is a
predicate of Wisdom or appears in Gen 1:27). It was possible for Paul to have composed
the confession that Jesus Christ is the eijkw;n tou` qeou` (―image of God‖) and used it both in
2 Corinthians 4:4 and Colossians 1:15 (see below). Further, what does the observation
about rare words—oJratov", ajovrato", qrovnoi, kuriovthte", sunivsthmi, katoikevw,
prwteuvw and eijrhnopoievw—prove? Was Paul incapable of using these words if the
subject matter so demanded? Were there better or more natural terms at the writer‘s
disposal if he needed to introduce these particular motifs (cf. Moule, 61, 62)? oJrato"
(―visible‖) and ajovrato" (―invisible‖) are not strange words for one who uses the latter for
the invisible nature of God in Romans 1:20. qrovnoi (―thrones‖) and kuriovthte"
(―dominions‖) are perfectly intelligible terms to have used if Paul, with special reference to
the Colossian heresy, emphasizes that even the cosmic principalities and powers were
created in Christ. The derivatives of the stem katallag—(―reconcile‖)—occur only in
Paul in the NT (Percy, Probleme, 86). The noun ajrchv (―beginning‖) rather than ajparchv
(―first-fruits‖) is entirely fitting in a passage where the supremacy of Christ is emphasized
and where the first creation and the new creation are paralleled, particularly as Christ is
designated as the beginning of the new creation and the One who has initiated it by his
resurrection. Again it is doubtful whether all the passages mentioning the blood of Christ
are pre-Pauline (cf. Rom 5:9). But even if this were the case, Paul would presumably have
made it his own and therefore could still have used it as such in the paragraph of verses
15–20. As in Romans 5:1–11 the motifs of reconciliation and peace are tied in with the
blood of Christ for it is the means of atonement (cf. Rom 3:25).
The second argument against the Pauline authorship of Colossians 1:15–20 is based on
structural grounds so that an original hymn, reconstructed according to rhythm, parallelism
and strophic arrangement, has been taken over and reworked by the author of Colossians.
But if our arguments above—about the uncertainty of the stylistic criteria, the number and
content of the stanzas in verses 15–20, the possible Pauline additions, and thus the question
of whether a hymn was constructed according to a strict scheme at all—are correct, then
this argument too is not proven.
    In other words, the case against the Pauline authorship is considerably more flimsy than
its more ardent advocates would have us believe. We may thus ask: Is it impossible to
imagine that Paul was using a hymn which he had earlier composed (so Feuillet, Christ,
246–73) with interpretative additions or expansions here and there (but not corrections or
contradictions) in view of the situation of his readers, or expressing in an exalted hymnic
style his beliefs about Christ in view of the situation of his readers and making use of some
of their language? In our view one or other of these alternatives is more likely than that the
hymn is pre-Pauline.
    Recently Kim (Paul‘s Gospel, 173–339, especially 173–79) has argued that it was Paul
who initiated the ―identification‖ of Jesus with the divine Wisdom in the early church, and
this as early as the first half of the ‘30s. He has pointed out that the designation of Christ as
the eijkw;n tou` qeou` (―image of God,‖ 2 Cor 4:4; Col 1:15; cf. the almost synonymous
morfh; qeou`, ―form of God,‖ Phil 2:6; Martin, Carmen Christi, 99–133, especially
107–120, and Kim, Paul‘s Gospel, 247–60) and the theme of Christians being conformed
or transformed to the image of Christ appear explicitly only in Paul‘s letters of the N T (Rom
8:29; 1 Cor 15:49; cf. v 52; cf. Col 3:9; 10; Eph 4:24). In John (cf. the lovgo" in chapter
1:1–18 becoming incarnate and revealing the Father: 12:45; 14:9; note too the statement
that the children of God ―shall be like him when he appears, for we shall see him as he is,‖
1 John 3:2) and Hebrews (note the Wisdom Christology of Heb 1:3 [cf. Wisd 7:26] where
the Son is the ―radiance [ajpauvgasma] of God‘s glory‖ and the ―exact representation
[carakthvr] of God‘s nature‖; cf. also the theme of Christians sharing the salvation,
perfection and glorification pioneered by the Son: 2:10, 11; cf. 5:9; 6:20; 10:14; 12:2) the
conceptual thought forms are similar to those of Paul, but the latter‘s actual expressions of
Christ as the ―image of God‖ and of the Christian‘s being conformed or transformed into
that image are different.
    Kim goes on to argue that Paul saw the exalted Christ in glory as the ―image of God‖
and as the Son of God on the road to Damascus. This perception led him to conceive of
Christ in terms of the personified Wisdom of God. Paul‘s Wisdom Christology was rooted
in the Damascus revelation. The OT and Jewish backgrounds provided him with certain
categories and thought-forms with which he could interpret the Damascus experience and
produce his theology. (A similar argument has been used by Kim, Paul‘s Gospel, 392–97,
to show that ― ‗reconciliation‘ is a distinctive Pauline theologoumenon to describe the
purpose of the atonement God has wrought in Christ‖ [392], and more recently by R. P.
Martin, Reconciliation. A Study of Paul‘s Theology. London: Marshall, Morgan and Scott.
Atlanta, GA: John Knox, 1981.)
If these arguments are convincing so that Paul was the first to identify Christ with the
eijkw;n tou` qeou`, and the Wisdom of God according to an OT and Jewish background, then
the case for the Pauline authorship of the hymn is considerably strengthened. In fact, the
only other alternative possible, if Kim‘s arguments are correct, is that the hymn is
post-Pauline (a point that critical scholars do not accept) and has been utilized by the
post-Pauline author of Colossians for his own purposes in writing the letter. (See the
introduction for our discussion of the authorship of Colossians.)

Comment
    15. o{" ejstin eijkw;n tou` qeou` tou` ajoravtou. The magnificent hymn in praise of Christ
begins by asserting that he, the beloved Son, is ―the image (eijkwvn) of the invisible God.‖
The very nature and character of God have been perfectly revealed in him; in him the
invisible has become visible. Both Old and New Testaments make it plain that ―no one has
ever seen God.‖ The Fourth Evangelist, however, adds that ―the only begotten Son, who is
in the bosom of the Father, has made him known‖ (John 1:18). A similar statement is made
elsewhere by Paul who, probably with the Damascus road experience in mind, asserts that
―the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God (eijkw;n tou` qeou`)‖
had dawned upon him. The God whose creative Word in the beginning called light to shine
forth from the darkness had now shone in his heart ―to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ‖ (2 Cor 4:4, 6; cf. 3:18). The same point is made
in another way by the writer to the Hebrews that Christ is the ―radiance (ajpauvgasma) of
God‘s glory and the very impress of his being‖ (Heb 1:3).
    eijkwvn (―image‖) is employed by Paul on a number of occasions not only with reference
to Christ as the image of God (here and 2 Cor 4:4), but also regarding the corollary of the
increasing transformation of the people of Christ into that same image by the power of the
indwelling Spirit (2 Cor 3:18; cf. Col 3:10; Eph 4:24), so that at the end nothing remains of
the earthly image in those who finally show forth the image of the heavenly man (1 Cor
15:49; Rom 8:29; cf. Bruce, Paul, 123; see above, where it is pointed out that linguistically,
though not conceptually, Paul‘s use of ―image‖ in this twofold way is unique in the NT).
    Regarding Colossians 1:15, we are reminded of the OT where it is stated that man was
made in God‘s image (Gen 1:26, 27) and for his glory (Isa 43:7). He is, the apostle states,
―the image and glory of God‖ (1 Cor 11:7). Some have suggested it is difficult to separate
Paul‘s depicting of the risen Christ as the second man, the last Adam, from his view of
Christ as the image of God and the revealer of his glory (Bruce, Paul, 123). These two
strands may well coalesce.
But Genesis 1 alone does not adequately explain the background to our phrase in
Colossians 1:15 as Burney (JTS 27 [1926] 160–77) and others thought. On the other hand,
attempts to understand the meaning of Paul‘s statement against an exclusively Greek
background are not convincing either (see Feuillet, Christ, 166–75, for references). For
although Plato had already called the cosmos the visible image of God (Tim 92c) and this
notion was taken up elsewhere (cf. Lohse, 47), it does not explain the meaning of Paul‘s use
of eijkwvn here. Rather, as many scholars have argued, the Hellenistic-Jewish texts of
Proverbs 8:22 and Wisdom 7:25 (cf. Kehl, Christushymnus, 52–81, especially 61–67, and
Gibbs, Creation, 102, for references) provide a more convincing background to the
meaning of ―image.‖ This term, used to refer to the divine revelation, was taken over in
Hellenistic Judaism and transferred to ―Wisdom.‖ According to Proverbs 8:22, Wisdom
was with the Lord at the beginning of his work, the creation of the world, while in Wisdom
7:25 the divine Wisdom which is personified, is described as the ―image‖ (eijkwvn) of God‘s
goodness, i.e. the one who reveals the goodness of God.
    Paul, in common with other NT writers (John 1:4; Heb 1:3), identified Christ with the
Wisdom of God (see further Kim, Paul‘s Gospel, 173–339), ascribing to him certain
activities which are predicated of personified Wisdom in the OT and Jewish literature.
    As the first title of majesty, ―image‖ emphasizes Christ‘s relation to God. The term
points to his revealing of the Father on the one hand and his pre-existence on the other—it
is both functional and ontological.
    prwtovtoko" pavsh" ktivsew". If ―image‖ (eijkwvn) emphasizes Christ‘s relation to God,
then the second title, ―firstborn of all creation‖ (on the omission of the article before
―creation‖ see Robertson, Grammar, 772, and BDF, para. 275[3]) designates his relationship
to the creation. Stripped from its context and from other Pauline statements about Christ
this phrase might be understood to include him among created things (as simply the
―eldest‖ of the ―family‖: at Rom 8:29 prwtovtoko" appears to be used in this inclusive
sense).
    But the context makes it plain that the title cannot refer to him as the first of all created
beings since the immediately following words, which provide a commentary on the title
(o{ti), emphasize the point that he is the one by whom the whole creation came into being.
Further, apart from the incompatibility of this thought with the teaching of Paul in general
about the person and work of Christ, such an understanding is not required by the word
prwtovtoko" (―firstborn‖) itself.
    The term ―firstborn‖ was frequently used in the LXX (130 times), mostly in genealogies
and historical narratives, to indicate temporal priority and sovereignty of rank. Frequently
―firstborn‖ was employed to denote one who had a special place in the father‘s love. So
Israel is called ―my beloved son‖ (uijo;" prwtovtokov" mou, Exod 4:22), a phrase that
expresses the particularly close relation between God and Israel. In Judaism the messianic
king, as well as Israel, the patriarchs and the Torah are given this title of distinction (for
references see Str-B 3, 256–58, 626; Michaelis, TDNT 6, 873–76).
    Within the NT ―firstborn‖ (prwtovtoko"), which occurs in the plural at Hebrews 11:28
and 12:23, always refers in the singular to Jesus Christ. In most of these contexts while
priority of time is in view (Rom 8:29; cf. the parallel expressions in 1 Cor 15:20 and Acts
26:23; Rev 1:5) the notion of supremacy or priority of rank tends to dominate.
The title ―firstborn,‖ used of Christ here and in verse 18, echoes the wording of Psalm
89:27, where God says of the Davidic king: ―I also will make him my firstborn, the highest
of the kings of the earth.‖ But as many have noted this title belongs to Jesus Christ not only
as the Messiah of David‘s line, but also as the Wisdom of God (so Bruce, 194, 195, and
Lohse, 48), a background we observed in connection with him as the ―image of the
invisible God.‖ (For further references to Wisdom see Wilckens and Fohrer, TDNT 7,
465–526.)
     While Jewish writers speculated about Wisdom by giving to it a quasipersonal status (it
was present with God from all eternity, Wisd 9:9; sharing the divine throne, Wisd 9:4;
existing before heaven and earth, and according to Philo was the ―firstborn son,‖
prwtovgono" uiJov": ConfLing 146; Agric 51; Som 1.215; the instrument ―through whom
the universe came into existence,‖ Fug 109), the NT writers know that ―whether they speak
of this Wisdom expressly or only by allusion they are speaking of a living person, one
whom some of them had met face to face. To them all, as to Paul, Jesus Christ was the
incarnate Wisdom of God‖ (Bruce, 195).
     As prwtovtoko" Christ is unique, being distinguished from all creation (cf. Heb 1:6).
He is both prior to and supreme over that creation since he is its Lord.
     16. o{ti ejn aujtw`/ ejktivsqh ta; pavnta. The statement about Christ‘s unique position as
―firstborn of all creation‖ is now given more explicit proof in the words: ―because (o{ti) in
him all things were created.‖ The passive form ―were created‖ (ejktivsqh) indicates that
God is the Creator, a point that is reiterated later in the verse when the clause is taken up
again with the statement ―all things were created [sc. by God] (e[ktistai)through him and
for him.‖ In the first clause the aorist tense is employed to draw attention to the historical
act, while the second reference uses the perfect to focus on creation‘s continuing existence.
And the historical act of God ―in him‖ establishes that Christ is (and ―continues to be,‖ so
Schweizer, Beiträge, 123) the ―firstborn of all creation.‖
     The phrase ―in him‖ (ejn aujtw`/) has occasioned some difficulty. Many commentators
take the words in an instrumental sense. So Lohse (50) contends, for the following reasons,
that they mean all things have been created ―through him‖ (= diÆ aujtou`): first, the religious
background, i.e. Jewish speculations about Wisdom, require that the phrase be regarded in
this way. To treat it as referring to location, he claims, is possible only on the basis of a
different history of religions background. Second, the parallel clause at the end of the verse
with its phrase ―through him‖ (diÆ aujtou`) is said to argue for this interpretation; while,
third, the parallel statements from 1 Corinthians 8:6 (―through whom are all things,‖ diÆ ou|
ta; pavnta) and John 1:3 (―all things were made through him,‖ pavnta diÆ aujtou` ejgejneto)
are thought to support it.
Quite clearly the point about Christ as the Mediator of creation includes the notion of
instrumentality. But is the phrase stating something more than this, going beyond even 1
Corinthians 8:6 and John 1:3? We agree with Haupt (30, 31; cf. Percy, Probleme, 69, 70)
and Bruce (197) who suggest that the preposition ―in‖ (ejn) points to Christ as the ―sphere‖
(cf. ―in him‖ of v 19) within which the work of creation takes place. According to Haupt the
phrase ―in him‖ has the same force as in Ephesians 1:4; God‘s creation, like his election,
takes place ―in Christ‖ and not apart from him. On Christ depended (causally, so Meyer,
281) the act of creation so that it was not done independently of him (cf. Schweizer,
Beiträge, 123–25).
     Commentators have drawn attention to the affinities between Paul‘s language and Stoic
terminology, notably the use of ―all‖ (pa`") and the play on prepositions (ejk—eij"—ejn) by
which the final unity of all that exists is expressed (Norden, Agnostos Theos, 240–50, 347,
348; see Lohse, 49, 50; and Schweizer, 61, for further references). So Norden and others
have cited the statement of Marcus Aurelius, ―O Nature … all things come from you,
subsist in you, go back to you‖ (M. Aurelius, Meditations 4.23). Now it is one thing to note
the linguistic affinities, another to argue that the meaning is the same or that Paul‘s thought
is derived from Stoicism (Pöhlmann, ZNW 64 [1973] 53–74, has argued that the
―all‖-formula was used in many other traditions besides Stoicism, especially in Jewish
ones; Bruce, 199, claims that to derive the ―all‖ and prepositional constructions from Stoic
formulations is to ―pay more attention to the form of words than to their substance‖). His
ideas are very different from Stoic notions; for it is impossible in Paul to identify God with
nature or some pantheistically conceived world-soul (cf. Kehl, Christushymnus, 103). And
although it might have been possible for Paul, by using Stoic terms, to describe the creation
as being called into existence through God‘s act—so providing a point of contact with those
who had previously come from such a milieu—there is some difficulty with this because of
the late dating of the linguistic parallels (Schweizer, 60, 61).
    Rather, Paul‘s language is derived from Genesis 1 and the OT Wisdom literature (cf.
Kehl, Christushymnus, 104–108), where Wisdom is styled the Creator‘s ―master-workman‖
(Prov 8:30). For Paul, however, that ―master-workman‖ is no longer a figure of speech, but
the personal, heavenly Christ who had confronted him on the Damascus road.
    ejn toi`" oujranoi`" kai; ejpi; th`" gh`", ta; oJrata; kai; ta; ajovrata. The expression ―all
things‖ (taj pavnta) is expanded and depicted more clearly by two lines which are
constructed chiastically in synonymous parallelism:


ejn toi`" oujranoi`" kai; ejpi; th`"

ta; ojrata; kai; ta; ajovrata

―in heaven and on earth,

things visible and invisible.‖

    ―Heaven‖ and ―invisible‖ correspond as do ―earth‖ and ―visible.‖ The expressions in
the parallel lines embrace everything for there are no exceptions (Pöhlmann, ZNW 64 [1973]
58, 59, rightly points out that here is an example of inclusio: that is, the words ta; pavnta
are repeated in the concluding line so binding the chiastic structure together). All things
have been brought into existence by the creative act of God in Christ.
ei[te qrovnoi ei[te kuriovthte" ei{te ajrcai; ei[te ejxousivai. Probably with special
reference to the Colossian heresy Paul now emphasizes that even the cosmic powers and
principalities, which apparently received some prominence in that heresy, were created in
Christ. Good or bad, all are subject to him as Creator. No doubt it is the hostile rather than
the friendly powers Paul has particularly in view (although H. Schlier, Principalities and
Powers in the New Testament [Questiones Disputatae 3; Freiburg: Herder, 1961] 14, 15, is
of the opinion they are all wicked, hostile to God and Christ), as he endeavors to show the
Colossians their proper place in relation to Christ (Bruce, 198). And the argument he
develops in chapter 2 is that they were vanquished through that same Lord. None needs to
be placated. They derive their existence from him, and they owe their obedience to him
through whom they have been conquered (2:10,
    Here four classes of angelic powers are listed: ―thrones‖ (qrovnoi) and ―dominions‖
(kuriovthte", cf. 1 Cor 8:5), which were occasionally mentioned in Judaism among
heavenly hosts of angels (2 Enoch 20:1; Test Levi 3:8), as well as ―principalities‖ (ajrcaiv)
and ―powers‖ (ejxousivai)—often named as supermundane beings and powers (for details
see Lohse, 51). They probably represent the highest orders of the angelic realm. Whether
the list is complete (here dunavmei", found in Rom 8:38; cf. 1 Cor 15:24; Eph 1:21, is
missing) or the powers are arranged in a particular order is beside the point (Schlier,
Principalities, 13, 14). From the highest to the lowest, all alike are subject to Christ. They
were created in him, through him and for him.
    Paul‘s teaching about Christ as the goal of all creation (eij" aujtovn is used of God at 1
Cor 8:6; cf. Percy, Probleme, 72, 73) finds no parallel in the Jewish Wisdom literature or in
the rest of the extant Jewish materials for that matter. Martin (NCB, 58) aptly comments:
―No Jewish thinker ever rose to these heights in daring to predict that Wisdom was the
ultimate goal of all creation.‖ And it needs to be remembered that the One of whom Paul
speaks in this vein had recently been crucified as a common criminal in Jerusalem.
However, he had risen victoriously from the dead and revealed himself to Paul as Son of
God (Gal 1:15, 16). To him as goal the whole of creation, and therefore history as well,
moved. It was the Father‘s intention that all things should be summed up in Christ (cf. Eph
1:10).
    17. kai; aujtov" ejstin pro; pavntwn kai; ta; pavnta ejn aujtw`/ sunevsthken In a twofold
statement about the preexistence and cosmic significance of Christ the teaching of verses
15 and 16 is reiterated (cf. Bruce, 220, and Benoit, Christianity, 228; on the importance of
this verse see Hegermann, Schöpfungsmittler, 93, 94). There is no interest in the state or
condition of the universe as such—only the concern to reassert the point about Christ‘s
supremacy over the world. The first affirmation, ―he is before all things‖ (aujtov" ejstin
pro; pavntwn), declares his temporal priority to the universe. Therefore one could not
rightly say as Arius did that: ―There was once when he was not‖ (h\n pote o{te oujk h\n). At
the same time the statement implies his primacy over the cosmos (cf. Harris, NIDNTT 3,
1177) and points back to the earlier designation ―firstborn of all creation.‖ As the
preexistent One (cf. John 8:58) he is Lord of the universe. Schweizer has made the
interesting suggestion that the emphatic ―he‖ (aujtov") of this affirmation corresponds to the
solemn ―I‖ of the OT which refers to Yahweh himself (62).
ta; pavnta ejn aujtw`/ sunejsthken. Not only was the universe created in the Son as the
sphere, by him as the divine agent, and for him as the goal; it was also established
permanently ―in him‖ alone, as the second affirmation, ―in him all things are held
together,‖ asserts. He is the sustainer of the universe and the unifying principle of its life.
Apart from his continuous sustaining activity (note the perfect tense sunevsthken) all
would disintegrate.
    Many have drawn attention to the similarities between this statement and the language
of Platonic and Stoic philosophy where the term sunesthkevnai (Plato, Republic 530a;
Pseudo Aristotle, Mund 6; PhiloRerDivHer 281, 311) was employed to denote the
wonderful unity of the entire world (for further references see Hegermann,
Schöpfungsmittler, 94, 95; Feuillet, Christ, 214; and Lohse, 52). While there are points of
linguistic contact with Stoicism especially, and thus the languag of the hymn may well have
served as a bridge for those from such a background (cf. the similar function of lovgo" in
John 1), nevertheless Pauline thought is different from the pantheistically conceived
world-soul of Stoicism. As Feuillet, Schweizer and others have noted, the parallels from
Hellenistic Judaism, especially the LXX, are much closer. According to Wisdom 1:7, the
Spirit ―of the Lord, indeed, fills the whole world, and that which holds all things together
(sunevcon ta; pavnta) knows every word that is said‖ (JB; on the use of sunevcw rather than
sunivsthmi see Feuillet, Christ, 215), while Ecclesiasticus 43:26 states that ―all things hold
together by means of his word‖ (JB; ejn lovgw/ aujtou` sujgkeitai ta; pavnta). Martin (NCB,
59), following R. B. Y. Scott (―Wisdom in Creation: the  of Proverbs viii.30.‖ VT 10
[1960] 213–23), considers the thought is probably indebted to Proverbs 8:30 where
Wisdom is called God‘s ÷ma
    ,  (RSV ―master workman‖). Although Scott translates this as a ―living link or vital
bond‖ and suggests that Wisdom is regarded as a principle of coherence between God and
his world, the appropriateness of his rendering has been questioned. For Paul, it is the
Christ who has made himself known to the apostle who is the Sustainer and Unifier of the
universe. As the Epistle to the Hebrews puts it, the Son of God through whom the worlds
(aijw`ne") were made sustains all things and bears them to their appointed end (fevrwn … ta;
pavnta) by his powerful word (1:2, 3).
    18. kai; auJtov" ejstin hj kefalh; tou` swvmato", th`" ejkklhsiva". With the mention of
Christ as the head of the church, the hymn, according to Feuillet (Christ, 217), passes from
a cosmological perspective to a soteriological one, a perspective that is maintained right to
the end of the passage since this notion is of the utmost significance.
    But not all commentators agree that verse 18a, at least as far as the original hymn was
concerned, opens the soteriological section. The great majority of exegetes (see the list in
Benoit, Christianity, 244) consider, on stylistic grounds, that the final strophe of the hymn
commences with the words of verse 18b, ―He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead‖
(o{" ejstin ajrchv, prwtovtoko" ejk tw`n nekrw`n), so paralleling the opening statement of
verse 15, ―He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation‖ (o{" ejstin
eijkw;n tou` qeou` tou` ajoravtou, prwtovtoko" pavsh" ktivsew"). On this view the statement
of verse 18a, ―He is the head of the body,‖ forms a climax to the first part of the poem (or
the middle strophe according to some) and refers to Christ‘s headship over the entire
cosmos. The words ―the church‖ (th`" ejkklhsiva") were added as a gloss by either Paul or
the final redactor of the hymn (if the letter is regarded as coming from the Pauline school
but not Paul himself) who has reinterpreted the cosmological statement along
ecclesiological lines, thereby making his own significant contribution. Clearly the term
―body‖ (sw`ma) in the original hymn was used to denote the whole cosmos, a usage which
the majority believes to be paralleled in other writers from early times (for details see Ernst,
Pleroma, 154–56, and Schweizer, TDNT 7, 1024–94).
According to Plato, the cosmos is a living being with a soul and pervaded by reason (Tim
31b,32a, etc). The cosmos is a body that is directed by the divine soul which it follows as it
is led (Tim 47c–48b). An Orphic fragment refers to Zeus as the ―head‖ (kefalhv) of the
cosmos who with his power pervades the universe, the body (Fragment 168). In Stoic
thought the cosmos is a living entity, the perfect sw`ma (―body‖) whose unity is everywhere
given special emphasis. Created by God, it is governed by him as the world soul. In fact,
the cosmos is God himself (cf. Lohse, 53, 54).
    Philo of Alexandria referred to the world of the heavens as a uniform body over which
the Logos was set as head (Som 1.128). As the body of man needs the direction and
guidance given by the head (Philo, Spec. Leg. 3.184), so too the ―body‖ of the universe
needs the eternal Logos which is its head to direct it (Quaest in Ex 2.117). So on the view
that the words of the hymn are a cosmological assertion it is stated that Christ is the ―head‖
(kefalhv) who rules the ―body‖ (sw`ma) of the cosmos. The universe is governed and held
together by this head; it was founded and established in him alone.
     There are, however, serious difficulties with this majority view. First, as has already
been pointed out (see 35–37), the application of various stylistic criteria has not led to any
consensus about the original structure of the hymn. Arguments from strophic balance have
been shown to be so precarious that it is uncertain that the words ―the church‖ could not
have belonged to the original hymn. Most recent writers regard the words as a redactional
addition but Kehl (Christushymnus, 93, 97: cf. Hegermann, Schöpfungsmittler, 106) and
Gibbs (Creation, 105) have argued that they are essential to the meaning of verse 18a.
Second, it is by no means certain that ―body‖ (sw`ma) originally referred to the cosmos.
There is no parallel to this in the Pauline corpus where sw`ma is employed ninety-nine
times. But on the other hand, and significantly, sw`ma is used to designate the church or
local congregation as the body of Christ. At 1 Corinthians 12:12–27 where the apostle is
concerned to impress on the Corinthian Christians that as fellow-members of that body they
have mutual duties and common interests which must not be neglected, he asserts ―you are
the body of Christ and severally members of it‖ (v 27). Again at Romans 12:4, 5 where
Paul focuses on the varieties of service the different members of the church render, in
accordance with their respective gifts, he declares: ―For as in one body we have many
members, and all the members do not have the same function, so we, though many, are one
body in Christ, and individually members one of another.‖
     In these earlier letters, Paul employs the body terminology and its constituent parts to
refer to the mutual relations and obligations of church members. Here the ―head‖ (kefalhv)
of the body has no special position or honor; it is counted as an ordinary member (1 Cor
12:21; Best, Body, 113). In Colossians (and Ephesians) there is an advance in the line of
thought so that the relationship which the church, as the body of Christ, bears to Christ as
head of the body is treated. Many regard this difference as a valid argument against the
identity of authorship (so, for example, Lohse, 55), but such a conclusion is unnecessary
(see xlv). As Bruce (Paul, 421) has recently pointed out, the ―advance from the language of
simile in 1 Corinthians and Romans to the real and interpersonal involvement expressed in
the language of Colossians and Ephesians may have been stimulated by Paul‘s
consideration of the issues involved in the Colossian heresy.‖ We have noted that Paul had
repeatedly spoken of the church as the body of Christ. His headship over the church could
easily be conceived as an organic relationship in which he exercised the control over his
people that the head of a body exercises over its various parts. The living relationship
between the members is thereby kept in view (so 1 Corinthians and Romans), while the
dependence of the members on Christ for life and power as well as his supremacy is
reiterated against a heresy that called such matters into question.
If it is unnecessary to consider that the term ―body‖ originally referred to the cosmos in the
hymn then there is no need to look for Stoic antecedents as the source of the writer‘s ideas
(Best, Body, 83; Bruce, Paul, 420, claims to do this is ―an unwarranted exercise of the
imagination‖), even though there may be some linguistic parallels. Nor are the antecedents
of Gnosticism, the Christian Eucharist, or rabbinic speculation on the body of Adam likely
sources for this conception of the church as the body of Christ. A more fruitful line of
inquiry, which was earlier mentioned by Best (Body, passim) is the OT concept of corporate
personality, where an oscillation between the one and the many, the individual and the
corporate can be traced. The notion is by no means strange to Paul for Christ and his people
are so closely linked (concerning the notion of the corporate Christ see C. F. D. Moule, The
Origin of Christology [Cambridge: University Press, 1977] 47–96) that on occasion he and
they together can be called ―Christ‖ (1 Cor 12:12). Further, we might well ask whether the
notion was not indelibly impressed on Paul‘s mind when on the Damascus road he was
addressed: ―Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me (tiv me diwvkei";)?‖ (Acts 9:4).
     We consider, then, that it was Paul, rather than some unknown redactor, who is the
originator of this way of expressing the church‘s vital union with Christ, the head (cf. Col
2:19). Using the Old Testament concept of corporate personality and by referring to ―body‖
(sw`ma) and ―head‖ (kefalhv) as he does, he has made his own distinct contribution to NT
Christology and ecclesiology. In the context headship over the body refers to Christ‘s
control over his people as well as the dependence of all the members on him for life and
power (cf. 2:19; for an important discussion on the meaning of kefalhv as ―origin‖ see S.
Bedale, ―The Meaning of kefalhv in the Pauline Epistles,‖ JTS 5 [1954) 211–15). As the
body of Christ the church is vitalized by his abiding presence and his risen life.
th`" ejkklhsiva". (On the meaning of ejkklhsiva in Colossians, see 57–61).
     o{" ejstin ajrchv, prwtovtoko" ejk tw`n nekrw`n. The person who is head of the body, the
church, is the risen Christ, for he is called the ―beginning‖ (ajrchv; this word, like prw`to",
being absolute in itself does not require the definite article; it is most commonly omitted
when ajrchv occurs as a predicate: so Lightfoot, 155), and the ―firstborn from the dead‖
(prwtovtoko" ejk tw`n nekrw`n). The term ajrchv (―beginning‖; see Delling, TDNT 1,
479–84) has basically to do with primacy, whether in a temporal sense (Matt 19:4, 8; John
15:27; Acts 26:4; Heb 1:10; 2 Pet 3:4; 1 John 2:24, etc) or with reference to authority and
sovereignty (Rom 8:38; 1 Cor 15:24; Eph 1:21; 6:12, etc). In Judaism both Wisdom and the
Logos were called ―the beginning‖ (cf. Prov 8:23; Philo, Leg. All. 1.43). At Colossians 1:18
when it is said of Christ that he is the ―beginning,‖ it does not mean he is the ―beginning of
God‘s creation‖ (ajrch; th`" ktivsew" tou` qeou`, Rev 3:14), or its first cause, points that
might have applied in the first part of the hymn, but rather as the One who is ―the firstborn
from the dead‖ he is the founder of a new humanity. At Genesis 49:3 the two terms
―firstborn‖ and ―beginning‖ appear together to describe the firstborn as the founder of a
people (cf. LXX Deut 21:17 and Rom 8:29). The resurrection age has burst forth and as the
first who has risen from among those who had fallen asleep (ejk tw`n nekrw`n) he is the
first-fruits who guarantees the future resurrection of others (1 Cor 15:20, 23).
     i{na gevhtai ejn pa`sin aujto;" prwteuvwn. Because Christ is the ―beginning‖ and the
―firstborn‖ in resurrection as well as in creation he has therefore become (note the aorist
gevnhtai) preeminent in all things. This was the divine intention as the purpose clause (i{na)
makes plain. The words ―be the first‖ (prwteuvw) resume the double reference to ―firstborn‖
(prwtovtoko", vv 15 and 18), as well as the phrase ―he is before all things‖ (v 17), while
the expression ―in all‖ (ejn pa`sin) is linked with the frequently mentioned ―all things‖ (ta;
pavnta). The hymn had previously asserted Christ‘s primacy in creation; it now mentions
his primacy in resurrection. In both new creation and old the first place belongs to him
alone (Michaelis, TDNT 6, 882). He has become preeminent ―in everything.‖
     19. o{ti ejn aujtw`/ eujdovkhsen pa`n to; plhvrwma katoikh`sai. The reason for (o{ti) this
primacy of Christ over everything is now given: ―in him all the fullness was pleased to
dwell.‖ Two main issues arise in this much disputed and frequently discussed verse: first,
what is the subject of ―was pleased‖ (eujdovkhsen): God, Christ or ―all the fullness‖?
Secondly, what does ―all the fullness‖ (pa`n to; plhvrwma) mean? (For a detailed treatment
of this verse with special reference to the meaning of plhvrwma see Ernst, Pleroma, 72–94.)
Regarding the first question it is unlikely that the Son is the subject of ―was pleased‖ for,
although Ephesians 2:16 asserts that it is he who reconciles (at 2 Cor 5:18, 19 it is the
Father), the phrase ejn aujtw`/ (i.e. in Christ) seems to exclude the Son as the subject (Moule,
70). Many exegetes consider that ―God‖ (oJ qeov") should be supplied as the subject of the
sentence, with the words ―all the fullness … to dwell‖ (pa`n to; plhvrwma katoikh`sai)
being taken as an accusative and infinitive construction: ―God was pleased to let all the
fullness dwell in him.‖ This suggestion fits well with the masculine participle ―making
peace‖ (eijrhnopoihvsa", v 20), while to insert the subject ―God‖ is quite proper since the
words eujdokiva and eujdokevw (cf. qevlhma) are sometimes used absolutely to denote the
good pleasure of God (Luke 2:14; Phil 2:13). On the other hand, it is grammatically
possible to regard ―all the fullness‖ (pa`n to; plhvrwma) as the subject, and if we understand
the phrase as meaning ―God in all his fullness‖ (see below) then the subsequent masculines,
eij" aujtovn (―to him‖) and eijrhnopoivhsa" (―having made peace‖), may be explained as a
construction according to sense, because plhvrwma then stands for a masculine (Moule, 70,
71; Münderlein, NTS 8 [1961–62] 265, 266). On balance, this solution is preferred since it is
not necessary to supply the missing subject, while at Colossians 2:9 in the following
commentary on this passage pa`n tov plhvrwma th`" qeovthto" (―all the fullness of deity‖)
is clearly the subject of the same verb katoikei`.
    Second, what does ―all the fullness‖ (pa`n to; plhvrwma) mean? Various answers have
been given depending in part on the history of religions background assigned to the notion.
Some understand plhvrwma as used in accord with the Gnostic (Valentinian) technical term
(note, for example, Lightfoot‘s treatment of this view, 255–71). Certainly the idea of
―fullness‖ played a significant role in the Gnosticism of the second century. The
Valentinians referred to ―pleroma‖ as the fullness of the emanations which came forth from
God. It signified the uppermost pneumatic world in close proximity to God which in turn
was separated from the cosmos by a boundary (for details see Ernst, Pleroma, 41–50;
Lohse, 57). But according to Valentinian teaching God himself, ―alone unbegotten, not
subject to place or time‖ (Hippolytus, Ref 6.29.5), was distinguished from the heavenly
fullness of emanations. Therefore others have argued that this understanding of the word
―pleroma‖ cannot contribute anything to the explanation of Colossians 1:19 since in the
hymn God himself is called ―pleroma.‖ The supposed parallels are later in time, while the
Redeemer of Colossians does not leave the ―pleroma‖ as in Gnostic thought when he makes
the long descent to the world. Accordingly Paul was not indebted to Gnostic thought for his
understanding of plhvrwma (note the careful argument of Overfield, NTS 25 [1978–79]
384–96);. But it is possible that he is undermining a cardinal point in the Colossian heresy
which considered supernatural powers to be intermediaries between God and the world, the
more so when it is considered that the phrase ―all the fullness‖ is tautologous. Kehl‘s
comment (Christushymnus, 119), that the ―fullness‖ is not a ―fullness‖ if it does not mean a
totality, is apt. The additional words ―all the‖ (pa`n tov) may well be polemical.
    The backgrounds in popular Stoicism (Dupont) and the Hermetic literature with the
cosmos as the ―fullness‖ do not provide an adequate basis for understanding Paul‘s use of
the term in Colossians 1:19 and 2:9. Rather, as Moule (164–69), Kehl (Christushymnus,
116–25) and Gibbs (Creation, 107, 108) have pointed out there is no need to look beyond
the OT for the source of Paul‘s ideas.
    Three observations need to be made in this connection: first, the word plhvrwma is
employed in the OT (cf. Ernst, Pleroma, 22–30) in rather stereotyped expressions with an
active meaning: the sea and its fullness (1 Chr 16:32; Ps 96:11; 98:7), the earth and
everything in it (Ps 24:1; Jer 8:16; 47:2; Ezek 12:19; 19:7; 30:12), and the world with all it
contains (Ps 50:12; 89:11). As yet, however, the term has not become a technical
expression with a fixed and clearly defined meaning.
Second, in language akin to plhvrwma the Old Testament recognizes that God himself (or
his glory) fills the whole universe: so Jeremiah 23:24, ― ‗Do I not fill (plhrw`) heaven and
earth?‘ says the Lord,‖ and Psalm 72:19, ―may his glory fill (plhrwqhvsetai) the whole
earth‖ (cf. Isa 6:3; Ezek 43:5; 44:4, where the cognate hlhvrh" occurs). Obviously this
notion, which draws attention to the immanence of God and his personal involvement in the
world, is not to be understood along either pantheistic or dualistic lines.
    Third, the verb ―be pleased‖ (eujdokevw) which often appears in the OT to denote the
good pleasure of God (Ps 44:3; 147:11; 149:4) is particularly used to designate divine
election. Of special significance is the connection between God‘s choosing and his
dwelling place. This conjunction repeatedly occurs and, on occasion, the same two verbs of
Colossians 1:19, eujdokevw and katoikevw are employed. Zion is ―the mountain on which it
pleased God to dwell‖ (eujdovkhsen oJ qeo;" katoikei`n ejn aujtw`/ LXX Ps 67:17; cf. LXX Ps
131:13, 14; Isa 8:18; 49:20, where the verb ―elect,‖ ejklejgomai, replaces ―be pleased‖). As
is well-known in Deuteronomic theology, the notion of the God of Israel choosing a place
for himself where he wants his name to dwell repeatedly appears (Deut 12:5, 11; 14:23;
16:2, 6, 11; 26:2, etc).
    These three lines converge at Colossians 1:19 in the person of Christ (cf. Kehl,
Christushymnus, 123, and Ernst, 171, and Pleroma, 84). He is the ―place‖ (note the
emphatic position of ejn aujtw`/) in whom God in all his fullness was pleased to take up his
residence (the verb is the aorist infinitive katoikh`sai). All the attributes and activities of
God—his spirit, word, wisdom and glory—are perfectly displayed in Christ (Bruce, 207).
This is no temporary indwelling as the verb katoikevw (in contrast to paroikevw, ―sojourn‖)
with its present tense at chapter 2:9 makes plain: ―in him all the fullness of deity dwells
(katoikei`) bodily.‖
    He is the one mediator between God and the world of mankind. The Colossian
Christians need not fear those supernatural powers under whose control men were supposed
to live, whether divine emanations, agencies or the like. God in all his divine essence and
power had taken up residence in Christ.
    20. kaiv diÆ aujtou` ajpokatallavxai … ta; ejn toi`" oujranoi`". With the statement about
God‘s good pleasure in reconciling all things through Christ, the conclusion of the final
strophe occurs, and the ―high point‖ (so Kehl, Christushymnus, 125) of the hymn is
reached.
    The opening words of the paragraph have asserted that all things—the various heavenly
bodies, thrones, lordships, principalities, powers and so on—were created in Christ,
through him and for him. He is their Lord in creation. What is not spelled out, however, is
what has happened to all things since creation (C.K. Barrett. From First Adam to Last. A
Study in Pauline Theology [New York: Scribner‘s, 1962, 86]). Although there has been no
previous mention of it, the presupposition is that the unity and harmony of the cosmos have
suffered a considerable dislocation, even a rupture, thus requiring reconciliation (Lohse, 59;
cf. Schweizer, 68, Schnackenburg, EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1, 38, Hegermann,
Schöpfungsmittler, 103–105, and others). (On the problem of a disruption in nature within
the thought of Hellenistic Judaism, see Schweizer, 68.)
The notion of reconciliation is certainly Pauline, appearing in the major letters (Rom 5:10,
11; 11:15; 2 Cor 5:18–20), even though the compound verb ajpokatallavssw (―reconcile‖)
is unusual (cf. Eph 2:16 in addition to Col 1:20, 22) and is possibly a Pauline creation
(Benoit, Christianity, 249). Also in each reference the ground of reconciliation lies in the
gracious initiating activity of God (at Rom 5:8 the basis is the love of God, while Col 1:20
points to the divine good pleasure; cf. 2 Cor 5:18). The unusual feature of this passage is
that it refers to the reconciliation of ―all things‖ (ta; pavnta) and that as a past event.
Although 2 Corinthians 5:19 (cf. John 3:16 and similar passages) speaks of the
reconciliation of the world (kovsmo"), it is clear that it is the world of men which is in view.
Further, it is argued that the freeing of creation from its bondage to decay so that it obtains
the glorious liberty of the children of God (Rom 8:19–21) is a future eschatological event
(Schweizer, Beiträge, 133).
     Three related questions, therefore, arise: (a) What is the meaning of the phrase ―to
reconcile all things to him‖ (ajpokatallavxai taj pavnta eij" aujtovn)? (b) What is the
relationship of this expression to the words which follow, ―having made peace through the
blood of his cross‖ (eijrhnopoihvsa" dia; tou` ai{mato" tou` staurou` aujtou` )? (c) Is it
possible or even desirable to equate verse 20 with the notion of God‘s leading the evil
powers in his triumphal procession at chapter 2:15?
     The following views have been set forth as commentators have grappled with these
questions: (1) Noting that the verb to ―reconcile‖ properly applies to persons (except in the
language of actuaries or logic) some exegetes consider the objects of reconciliation to be
that which is reconcilable. On this view ―all things‖ (ta; pavnta) are concretized and
explained by the additional phrases ―whether things (ei[te tav) upon the earth, or things
(ei[te tav) in the heavens.‖ The first category is usually understood to denote the world of
men which is reconciled, the second the world of angels (either the renewed subordination
of the angels under Christ after his kenosis, so Michl, TQ 128 [1948] 442–62; or the
reconciliation of the angels of the law which had been dethroned according to chapter 2:15,
so B. N. Wambacq, ― ‗per eum reconciliare … quae in caelis sunt‘ Col 1:20, ‖ RB 55 [1948]
35–42). For a critique of this see Vögtle, Das Neue Testament, 222.
     (2) Kehl (Christushymnus, 163–65), refusing to understand ajpokatallavxaita; pavnta
as denoting ―an objective physical-metaphysical reconciliation of everything,‖ examined
the phrase against the background of God‘s glory filling the whole of creation. According
to Romans 1:23, pagans ―exchanged (h[llaxen) the glory of the immortal God for images
resembling mortal man or birds or animals or reptiles.‖ This, according to Kehl, was the
breach or rupture presupposed in Colossians 1. It had occurred in man, not in creation.
Reconciliation, therefore, involved the healing of this breach. ―The ajpokatallaghv of
Colossians 1:20 is the reversal of the exchange of Romans 1:23‖ (160). But in spite of its
many insights Kehl‘s approach has been criticized for its narrow anthropocentric slant. It
has been argued that he appears to oversimplify and limit the meaning of the text with its
utterances on the cosmic rule and peace-making work of Christ (cf. M. Barth, CBQ 30
[1968] 110; cf. Wolter, Rechtfertigung, 55).
(3) According to another view, reconciliation has to do with the subjection, that is, the
pacification of the cosmic powers. ―All things‖ (ta; pavnta) does not include the world of
men but denotes the cosmic forces as the object of God‘s reconciling activity. Since all of
these powers are evil (so Schlier, Principalities, 14, 15) they need to be brought into
subjection to Christ as head. They are ―pacified‖ through him (cf. Col 2:14, 15) and cosmic
peace is once again restored. However, if Kehl‘s view was open to the criticism of wrongly
limiting ―all things‖ to the world of men, this approach is open to a similar charge of
incorrectly narrowing the text to the cosmic powers, and while this viewpoint has the great
merit of seeking to relate chapter 2:15 to the climactic words of the hymn, it does not in the
end adequately explain the meaning of ―all things‖ (ta; havnta).
    (4) Lohse‘s view (59–61) is that the universe (―all‖), which suffered a considerable
disturbance, has now been reconciled through the Christ-event. Heaven and earth have been
returned to their divinely created and determined order and this has occurred through the
resurrection and exaltation of Christ. The universe is again under its head, and cosmic
peace—a peace which according to some apocalyptic expectations would only occur at the
end time—has returned. Lohse, along with the majority of recent commentators, regards the
phrase ―through the blood of his cross‖ (v 20) as an interpretative addition to the original
hymn by the author of the epistle. ―Peace has not been established in an other-worldly
drama but rather in the death of Jesus Christ‖ (60). The principalities are stripped of their
power (cf. 2:14, 15) and the reconciliation of all things has taken place. This word is then
addressed to the recipients of the letter, for the message of reconciliation which pertains to
the whole world applies to them as well (vv 21–23).
    (5) The approach of F. Mussner (Christus, das All und die Kirche. Studien zur
Theologie des Epheserbriefes *[TTS 5; Trier: Paulinus, 1955]), following the view of
Gewiess (cf. Vögtle, Das Neue Testament, 227–29), considers the emphasis of the passage
lies elsewhere. Instead of underscoring the words ―all things‖ (ta; havnta) in the sentence,
and then determining what categories are included (e.g. How can the cosmos as an
impersonal entity be reconciled? Does the reconciliation concern men with God, men with
angels, men with one another, or fallen angels with God, etc?) this approach considers our
attention should be directed to the one who effects the reconciliation. The significant
question is not, ―Who or what is reconciled?‖ but ―Who is the mediator of reconciliation?‖
and the answer given is ―Christ alone‖ (Mussner, Christus, 71). In the first strophe of the
hymn the centrality of Christ is asserted and the ―all‖-formula is employed so as to elicit
praise for Christ as the Mediator and Lord of creation. He is also the focus of attention in
the second strophe, verses 18b–20, and the ―all‖-formula serves to point decisively to him
once again. He and only he is the Mediator of reconciliation. The statement of verse 20,
―whether things upon the earth, or things in heaven,‖ which is in apposition to ―all things,‖
does not contradict this view, it is argued, since the words do not provide a detailed
breakdown of the objects of reconciliation. The redactor of the hymn is only interested in
men as the objects (hence the application in vv 21–23), while the omission of any reference
to a cosmic fall is in keeping with the author‘s intention of focusing his interest on Christ.
Vögtle (Das Neue Testament, 227–29), who has recently championed this view, claims
Schweizer‘s emphatic statement about the reconciliation of all things being understood as
an ―exclusively Christological assertion‖ (Beiträge, 134) approximates to his own position.
But granted that the passage, in a magnificent fashion, emphasizes Christ‘s supremacy in
every sphere, clearly asserting that he alone is the Mediator of reconciliation, this same text
does in fact mention the objects or beneficiaries of this reconciliation, first generally (―all
things‖) and then rather more specifically (―whether on earth or in heaven‖). To ask ―Who
or what has been reconciled?‖ may not be the primary question, but it is a legitimate
question nevertheless since the text itself encourages us to look for an answer. Further, to
suggest with Vögtle, on the basis of the application in verses 21–23, that the ―redactor‖ is
only interested in men as objects, overlooks the fact that many truths of a Christological
kind asserted in the hymn are not directly applied to the readers. We ought, however, not to
conclude that these were therefore unimportant.
     (6) The ―reconciliation of all things‖ ought to be understood, in our judgment, with
Lohse (59) to mean that the ―universe has been reconciled in that heaven and earth have
been brought back into their divinely created and determined order … the universe is again
under its head and … cosmic peace has returned.‖
     Although Schweizer and others reject the suggestion, it is best to understand
―reconciliation‖ as expanded in the following words—―having made peace through the
blood of his cross.‖ If, on Schweizer‘s view, the author made corrections to the hymn, why
did he allow certain elements, which were different from his own theology, to remain? If
reconciliation and pacification are essentially different why did not the author remove the
idea which did not harmonize with his own view? (cf. O‘Brien, RTR 33 [1974] 45–53,
against Schweizer, Neotestamentica, 326, 327.)
     The peace which Christ has brought may be ―freely accepted, or … compulsorily
imposed‖ (Bruce, 210), for when Paul speaks of reconciliation on this wide front he
includes the notion of ―pacification.‖ If, as many commentators suggest, verse 20 is to be
understood in the light of God‘s triumph in Christ over the principalities and powers
(2:15)—though the meaning of Christ‘s reconciling work ought not to be limited by these
words of chapter 2:15 since it is broader than the pacification of the principalities and
powers, applying to the world of men, indeed the whole cosmos as well—then these are
certainly not depicted as gladly surrendering to God‘s grace but as ―submitting against their
wills to a power which they cannot resist‖ (Bruce, 210). In other words, they have been
pacified—a notion that was not strange to those living in the Mediterranean region under
Roman rule of the first century A.D. Yet ―pacification‖ of or victory over these powers,
presumed to be hostile toward God or Christ, does not mean they are done away with or
finally destroyed. It is evident that they continue to exist, inimical to man and his interests
(cf. Rom 8:38, 39; Barrett, Adam, 86). Nevertheless they cannot finally harm the person
who is in Christ, and their ultimate overthrow in the future is assured (1 Cor 15:24–28; see
on Col 2:15).
Paul affirms that this universal reconciliation has been brought about, not in some
other-worldly drama, but through something done in history, the death of Jesus Christ upon
the cross. Further at chapter 2:14, 15 it is asserted that God, in Christ, destroyed the
―certificate of indebtedness‖ that stood over against the Colossian Christians, nailing it to
the cross, and also vanquished the principalities and powers leading them in his triumphal
procession.
     W. Michaelis (Versöhnung des Alls. Die frohe Botschaft von der Gnade Gottes [Bern:
Siloah, 1950]) argued on the basis of Colossians 1:20, Ephesians 1:10, etc, that because
God‘s eternal plan and purpose was reconciliation then nothing in his creation would
finally or ultimately be lost. Yet can verse 20 be taken to mean that Paul looked for the
ultimate reconciliation to God of all people and, indeed, of hostile spiritual powers as well?
The cosmic reconciliation has to do with ta; havnta, including everything in its scope. The
reconciliation of the principalities and powers is in mind. They are one category whatever
others are included. Yet these forces are shown as submitting against their wills to a power
they cannot resist. They are reconciled through subjugation (cf. 1 Cor 15:28), and Christ‘s
victory has reduced them to the position of ―weak and beggarly elements‖ (cf. Gal 4:9).
Though they are included within the reconciliation, theirs is no glad surrender to the Lord
of the cosmos. Similarly it cannot be assumed from verse 20 that all sinful men have freely
accepted the peace effected through the death of Christ. Like the principalities and powers,
might not that peace have to be imposed compulsorily, at least on some?
Although all things will finally unite to bow in the name of Jesus and to acknowledge him
as Lord (Phil 2:10, 11), it is not to be assumed that this will be done gladly by all. For as
the words following the hymn (Col 1:21–23) indicate, the central purpose of Christ‘s work
of making peace has to do with those who have heard the Word of reconciliation and gladly
accepted it. To assert that verse 20 points to a universal reconciliation in which every man
will finally enjoy celestial bliss is an unwarranted assumption.

A Note on the Term ejkklhsiva in Colossians and Philemon

1. ejkklhsiva in the Greek city-state
The term ejkklhsiva (―assembly‖), derived from ejk-kalevw (―call out,‖ a verb used for the
summons to the army to assemble), is attested from the time of Euripides and Herodotus
onward (fifth cent. B.C.) and denoted the popular assembly of the full citizens of the povli"
or Greek city-state. During this period it met at regular intervals, though the term in cases
of emergency could describe an extraordinary gathering. Every citizen had the right to
speak and to propose matters for discussion. The term ejkklhsiva, centuries before the
translation of the OT and the time of the NT, was clearly characterized as a political
phenomenon; it was the assembly of full citizens, functionally rooted in the Greek
democracy, an assembly in which fundamentally political and judicial decisions were
taken. The ejkklhsiva (as distinct from the dh`mo" [―people, populace, crowd‖] which was
continuous) was only regarded as existing when it was actually assembled.

2. ejkklhsiva in the LXX, Josephus and Philo
    In the translation of the LXX the Greek word ejkklhsiva (―assembly‖) occurs about one
hundred times, of which twenty-two are in the Apocrypha. It represents the Hebrew 
(―assembly‖) some seventy-three times (but never , ―congregation‖; frequently 
is rendered by the Greek sunagwghv, ―place of assembly‖; W. J. Dumbrell, The Meaning
and Use of Ekklesia in the New Testament with Special Reference to its Old Testament
Background. University of London: Unpublished M.Th. thesis, 1966, 1–26, especially 3,
argued that although  and  have the same basic meaning of a convened meeting,
the latter ―represents the people as a national unit, whether assembled or not … while 
represents the people as summoned, convened or assembled for some special purpose‖).
The Hebrew term  and its Greek equivalent ejkklhsiva could describe assemblies of a
less specifically religious or nonreligious kind, for example the gathering of an army in
preparation for war (1 Sam 17:47; 2 Chron. 28:14) or the ―coming together‖ of an unruly
and potentially dangerous crowd (Ps 26 [LXX 25]: 5; Ecclus 26:5). However, particularly
significant are those instances of ejkklhsiva (rendering ) which denote the
congregation of Israel when it assembled to hear the Word of God on Mt. Sinai, or later on
Mt. Zion where all Israel were required to assemble three times a year. Sometimes the
whole nation appears to be involved, as on those occasions when Moses is addressing the
people prior to their entry into the promised land. In this connection Deuteronomy 4:10
may be cited. Recalling the scene at Sinai, Moses reminded the Israelites of ―the day when
you stood before the Lord your God in Horeb, when he said to me, ‗Assemble the people
before me to hear my words.‘ ‖ The parallel is even clearer in the LXX which uses the word
ejkklhsiva and its cognate ejkklhsiavzw: ―the day of the church when the Lord said to me,
‗Form the people into a church before me‘ ‖ (cf. Deut 9:10; 18:16; 31:30; 8:35 [LXX 9:2];
Judg 20:2, etc). At other times it is only the chief representatives that seem to be present, as
with the congregation of tribal heads, or patriarchal chiefs, at Solomon‘s dedication of the
Temple in Jerusalem (1 Kings 8:14, 22, 55, etc).
    Josephus also used the word frequently (some forty-eight times, of which eighteen are
LXX quotations), always of a gathering. These vary in character, e.g. religious, political and
spontaneous assemblies are mentioned (Josephus Ant 4.309; Life 268; J. W. 1.654, 666).
Philo employs the term some thirty times, all but five of which are in quotations from the
LXX. These five appear in a classical Greek sense.
The term, then, in the Greek and Jewish world prior to Paul meant an assembly or gathering
of people; it did not designate an ―organization‖ or ―society.‖ Although it had no
intrinsically religious meaning and could refer to meetings that were quite secular in
character, of special significance are those occurrences of ejkklhsiva in the LXX which refer
to the congregation of Israel when it assembled to hear the Word of God.

3. ejkklhsiva in the New Testament
The word ejkklhsiva turns up 114 times in the NT and over half of these occur in Paul
(sixty-two instances; and other occurrences are: Matthew, three; Acts, twenty-three;
Revelation, twenty; non-Pauline epistles, six). Whether the Christian use of ejkklhsiva was
first adopted from Jewish or Gentile usage is a disputed point. I. H. Marshall (―New Wine
in Old Wine Skins: V. The Biblical Use of the Word ‗,‘ ‖ ExpTim 84 [1972–73]
359–64) after an examination of the alternatives, contends that the most satisfactory
explanation for the Christian employment of the term is ―ultimately connected with the
Jewish use in the LXX” (362). (On the question as to why the early Church did not use
sunagwghv, ―gathering-place, place of assembly,‖ to describe itself—James 2:2, is the one
exception though even here ejkklhsiva occurs—if it was choosing a designation from the
LXX, W. Schrage, ― ‗Ekklesia‘ und ‗Synagoge.‘ Zum Ursprung des urchristlichen
Kirchenbegriffs,‖ ZTK 60 [1963] 178–202, argued the former was avoided because of its
close links with the Jewish law and because it had come to be used of Jewish buildings.
Although these reasons are possible, it must be remembered that ejkklhsiva denoted a
―meeting‖ or an ―assembly,‖ rather than an ―organization‖ or a ―society,‖ and this is how
the term is used in the NT.)

A. PAULINE USES IN THE EARLIER LETTERS

   OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE TERM EJKKLHSIVA (―ASSEMBLY‖) IN THE NT
ALL POSTDATE PAUL‘S USAGE OF THE WORD AND THEREFORE IT IS
NECESSARY TO DETERMINE THE MEANING HE ATTACHES TO IT IN THE
VARIOUS CONTEXTS. HIS FIRST USE OCCURS AT 1 THESSALONIANS 1:1 IN
HIS GREETINGS TO THE CHRISTIANS AT THESSALONICA: ―PAUL, SILAS AND
TIMOTHY. TO THE CHURCH OF THE THESSALONIANS (TH/` EJKKLHSIVA/
QESSALONIKEVWN) IN GOD THE FATHER AND THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.‖ THE
TERM IS EMPLOYED IN THE SAME WAY AS IN GREEK AND JEWISH CIRCLES,
THAT IS, LIKE OTHER ASSEMBLIES IN THE CITY, IT IS DESCRIBED AS ―A
GATHERING OF THE THESSALONIANS.‖ BUT IT IS DISTINGUISHED FROM THE
REGULAR POLITICAL COUNCILS BY THE ADDITION OF THE WORDS ―IN GOD
THE FATHER,‖ AND FROM THE REGULAR SYNAGOGUE MEETINGS BY THE
USE OF THE TERM EJKKLHSIVA AND THE ADDITIONAL PHRASE ―IN THE LORD
JESUS CHRIST‖ (SO CORRECTLY R. BANKS, PAUL‘S IDEA OF COMMUNITY. THE
EARLY HOUSE CHURCHES IN THEIR HISTORICAL SETTING (GRAND RAPIDS, MI:
EERDMANS, 1980) 43; NOTE THE SAME ASCRIPTION AT 2 THESS 1:1). FROM
THE CLOSING REMARKS OF THE LETTER IT IS CLEAR PAUL HAS IN MIND AN
ACTUAL GATHERING OF THE THESSALONIAN CHRISTIANS. SO HE REQUESTS
THAT HIS LETTER ―BE READ TO ALL THE BRETHREN‖ AND THAT THEY
―GREET ALL THE BRETHREN WITH A HOLY KISS‖ (1 THESS 5:26, 27).
In the two Thessalonian letters reference is made to ―the churches (ejkklhsivai) of God‖ (2
Thess 1:4) and ―the churches of God in Judea‖ (2:14). Other epistles such as Galatians
(1:2), the two letters to the Corinthians (1 Cor 7:17; 11:16; 14:33, 34; 2 Cor 8:19, 23, 24;
11:8, 28; 12:13) and Romans (16:4, 16) also employ the plural when more than one church
is in view (the only exceptions are the distributive expression ―every church,‖ 1 Cor 4:17,
and the phrase ―the church of God,‖ 1 Cor 10:32, in a generic or possibly localized sense).
So reference is made to ―the churches in Galatia (Gal 1:2; 1 Cor 16:1), ―the churches of
Asia‖ (1 Cor 16:19), ―the churches in Macedonia‖ (2 Cor 8:1), and ―the churches of Judea‖
(Gal 1:22). This suggests that the term was only applied to an actual gathering of people, or
to a group that gathers when viewed as a regularly constituted meeting (Banks, Idea, 43).
Although we often speak of a group of congregations collectively as ―the church‖ (i.e. of a
denomination) it is doubtful whether Paul (or the rest of the NT) uses ejkklhsiva in this
collective way. Also the notion of a unified provincial or national church appears to have
been foreign to Paul‘s thinking. An ejkklhsiva was a meeting or an assembly. This primary
sense of ―gathering‖ comes out clearly in 1 Corinthians 11–14 where expressions such as
―when you assemble in church‖ (1 Cor 11:18) and ―to speak in church‖ (14:35; cf. vv 4, 5,
12, 19, 28) turn up. It is of particular significance that at the beginning of the two
Corinthian letters (1 Cor 1:1; 2 Cor 1:1; cf. 1 Cor 10:32, 11:22 and Rom 16:16), the church
is described as belonging to the one who brought it into existence (that is, God), or the one
through whom this has taken place (that is, Christ). Such an ejkklhsiva was not simply a
human association or a religious club, but a divinely created entity (cf. Banks, Idea, 45).
    Paul‘s reference in Galatians (1:13: cf. also 1 Cor 15:9; Phil 3:6) to his original
persecution of ―the church of God‖ does not contradict this suggestion since the expression
may signify a reference to the church at Jerusalem before it was distributed into a number
of smaller assemblies in various parts of Judea, or that it was as the believers met together
that the arrests were made—their gathering together provided evidence of their Christian
associations (Banks, Idea, 44).

B. ejkklhsiva IN THE LATER LETTERS
OUR TERM EJKKLHSIVA TURNS UP FIVE TIMES IN COLOSSIANS AND
PHILEMON AND IS USED IN THREE SEPARATE THOUGH RELATED, WAYS: (A)
AT COLOSSIANS 4:16 THE WORD IS EMPLOYED IN ITS CUSTOMARY SENSE OF
AN ―ASSEMBLY,‖ THAT IS, AT LAODICEA. AS IN THE EARLIER INSTANCES SO
HERE TOO AN ACTUAL GATHERING IS IN VIEW: AFTER PAUL‘S LETTER TO
THE COLOSSIANS HAS BEEN READ ALOUD IN THE ASSEMBLY, THEY ARE TO
PASS IT, OR PERHAPS A COPY, ON, SO THAT IT MAY BE READ IN THE
CONGREGATION AT LAODICEA (THE EXPRESSION PARÆ UJMI`N, ―AMONG
YOU,‖ IS VIRTUALLY EQUIVALENT TO EJN … EJKKLHSIVA/, ―IN … THE
ASSEMBLY‖). (B) IN TWO REFERENCES EJKKLHSIVA DESIGNATES A
―HOUSE-CHURCH‖: SO AT COLOSSIANS 4:15 REFERENCE IS MADE TO
―NYMPHA AND THE CHURCH THAT IS IN HER HOUSE (KAI; TH;N KATÆ OI{KON
AUJTH`" EJKKLHSIVAN),‖ WHILE AT PHILEMON 2 IT IS CLEAR THAT
PHILEMON‘S HOUSE WAS USED AS A MEETING-PLACE IN COLOSSAE (―THE
CHURCH THAT MEETS IN YOUR HOUSE,‖ TH`/ KATÆ OI\KON SOU EJKKLHSIVA/).
PAUL HAS ALREADY USED THE WORD EJKKLHSIVA IN THIS SENSE OF A
―HOUSE-CHURCH‖ (ROM 16:5; 1 COR 16:19, BAG, 241; FOR FURTHER DETAILS
SEE ON COL 4:15).
     Of particular significance are the two instances in Colossians 1 where ejkklhsiva has a
wider reference than either a local congregation or a house-church: at verse 18 it is stated
that Christ is ―the head of the body, that is, the church,‖ while in verse 24 a similar
expression is employed in the context of Paul‘s sufferings (―on behalf of his body, which is
the church‖). Most commentators interpret these developed references in Colossians (and
the similar instances in Ephesians) of the ―universal church‖ which is scattered throughout
the world. But there are two serious criticisms that may be levelled against this view: first,
the term ejkklhsiva can no longer have its usual meaning of ―gathering‖ or ―assembly,‖
since it is difficult to envisage how a worldwide church could assemble, and the term
ejkklhsiva must be translated in some other way to denote an organization or society.
Second, the context of chapter 1:15–20 which is moving on a heavenly plane suggests it is
not an earthly phenomenon that is being spoken of in verse 18, but a supernatural and
heavenly one. Earlier in the letter it has been mentioned that the readers have already been
fitted for a share in the inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light, and have been
transferred from a tyranny of darkness to a kingdom in which God‘s beloved Son holds
sway (1:12–14). On the one hand, the Colossians are obviously members of an earthly
realm (note the exhortations of 3:4–4:6), and the apostle looks forward to their being
presented as ―holy, irreproachable and blameless‖ before God on the last day (1:22). On the
other hand, they are described as presently existing in a heavenly realm. Since they have
been raised with Christ they are to seek the things that are above where Christ is, seated at
God‘s right hand (3:1). Because they live with Christ in this heavenly dimension (note that
Christ who is their life is already in heaven, vv 3, 1) they are assured that when he appears
they will also appear with him in glory (v 4). Such thoughts are not entirely new: in
Galatians, Paul had already drawn a contrast between the children of the ―present
Jerusalem‖ and those who belong to the ―Jerusalem above‖ (Gal 4:25–27). Later, in his
letter to the Philippians, the idea is developed with reference to heavenly citizenship: the
Philippian Christians who are alive on earth are at the same time members of a heavenly
community (Phil 3:19, 20). ―Membership in this heavenly community, together with all the
benefits that accompany it, was as continuing an affair as membership in the Roman
commonwealth‖ (Banks, Idea, 53).
     Later references in Ephesians are thought to point in this same direction: it is expressly
mentioned that God ―made us alive with Christ, … raised us up with him and seated us in
the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus‖ (2:5, 6). The same readers of this circular letter have
been ―blessed … in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ‖ (1:3).
Again reference is made to Christ‘s headship over the ―church‖ (ejkklhsiva) which is his
body (1:22, 23). If the term ejkklhsiva is to be understood here as ―church‖ taking place in
heaven then this would mean that Christians participate in it as they go about their ordinary
daily tasks. They are already gathered around Christ which is another way of saying that
they now enjoy fellowship with him. Further references (3:10, 21; 5:23, 25, 27, 29, 32)
have been taken in the same way.
    If the term ejkklhsiva does point, on some occasions at least, to a heavenly entity then
one may well ask what is its relationship to the local congregations (or even
house-churches) which are styled ejkklhsivai? Certainly local gatherings are not part of the
heavenly church any more than they are part of an alleged universal church. Paul
consistently refers to the church which meets in a particular place. Even when there are
several gatherings in a single city (e.g. at Corinth) the individual assemblies are not
understood as part of the church in that place, but as one of ―the churches‖ that meet there.
This suggests that each of the various local churches are manifestations of that heavenly
church, tangible expressions in time and space of what is heavenly and eternal.
(For further references to secondary literature on ejkklhsiva, ―assembly, congregation,
church,‖ in addition to those already noted, see: Marshall, ExpTim 84 [1973], 359–64, and
Coenen, NIDNTT 1, 305–7.)

Explanation
The language of prayer and thanksgiving shades off at the end of chapter 1:14, with its
reference to the forgiveness of sins, into a magnificent hymnic passage in praise of Christ
as the Lord in creation and reconciliation. It begins with a series of predicates and activities
employed in the OT and Judaism of the personalized Wisdom of God which are applied to
the One who had been so ignominiously executed only a few years before.
     The first statement spells out his relationship to God, the second to creation. As the
―image of the invisible God,‖ Christ is the preexistent One who has revealed the very
nature and character of God. He is both prior to and supreme over creation, for he is its
Lord. All things have been created in him as the sphere and through him as the agent. Yet
the passage tells us more: Christ is unique, for he is the ultimate goal of all creation (no
parallel assertion was ever made of Wisdom in the OT or Jewish literature).
     Probably with special reference to the Colossian heresy the hymn emphasizes that even
the cosmic principalities and powers, from the highest to the lowest, are all subject to
Christ. It could not rightly be said that: ―There was once when he was not,‖ for the passage
asserts that he is both prior to the universe and supreme over it. Further, that universe was
established in him alone; apart from his continuous sustaining activity all would
disintegrate.
     Passing from a cosmological perspective to a soteriological one, Paul affirms that Christ
is the head of the body, that is, the church. That headship, pointing to an organic and living
relationship with his people, denotes his control over them and their total dependence on
him for life and power. It is the risen Christ who is this head; as the beginning and firstborn
in resurrection he is the founder of a new humanity. The hymn had previously asserted his
primacy in creation; now it mentions his primacy in resurrection. He has therefore become
preeminent in everything.
     The reason for this primacy is then spelled out: Christ is the one in whom God in all his
fullness was pleased to take up residence. His spirit, word, wisdom and glory are perfectly
displayed in Christ. Further, this was no temporary indwelling as the hymn and the
subsequent commentary on it (2:9) make plain.
    Although there has been no previous mention of it, the presupposition is that the unity
and harmony of the cosmos have suffered a dislocation, even a rupture, so requiring
reconciliation. It was God‘s good pleasure to reconcile all things through Christ. Heaven
and earth have been brought back to their divinely created and determined order. The
universe is under its Lord and cosmic peace has been restored. Reconciliation and making
peace (which includes the notion of pacification) are used synonymously to describe the
climactic work of Christ effected on the historical plane in and through his death on the
cross.
    To speak of this paragraph as a Christological digression or even as an excursus is
misleading for it is to suggest that the hymn does not really belong to its context. Whatever
previous existence the passage may have had (and whether it was composed by Paul or
not), it is clearly central to the context in which it currently stands, and the task of the
exegete is to explain its meaning within this framework and not some hypothetically
reconstructed context. Paul‘s lengthy prayer leads up to the hymn, while the words which
immediately follow take up phrases and ideas from it and apply the truths to the readers.
Indeed, the paragraph undergirds the whole letter; remove it and a serious dislocation
occurs.
The language is majestic. In the opening lines the writer has drawn on a Wisdom
background from the OT and Judaism, applying predicates and activities to Christ. Stylistic
features such as repetition, parallelism, chiasmus and inclusio (see p. 32–37) have all been
employed in order to praise Christ as the Lord in creation and reconciliation. Some of the
language, e.g. his lordship over the principalities and powers, appears to touch on the
heresy of the false teachers.
    In the words immediately following the hymn, themes, such as reconciliation, are
applied to the readers: Christ‘s mighty reconciling work had special reference to the
Colossians who had previously been alienated from God and at enmity with him. Later in
the letter other motifs are touched upon or expanded further (cf. 2:9). But not every
statement is directly applied to the recipients.
It is difficult to ascertain, perhaps impossible, how much the Colossians knew of the
language and concepts contained in the hymn prior to their reception of the letter. We are
told that they had accepted Christ Jesus the Lord as their tradition (2:6, 7), and in the light
of Paul‘s praise of the teaching ministry of his colleague, Epaphras (1:7; cf. 4:12, 13), we
may assume that what was asserted in the hymn was not inconsistent with the instruction
previously given in the gospel. However, we do know what Paul expected his readers to
understand now (chapter 2 will deal with some of the ramifications of this). Further, these
majestic words in praise of Christ may well have become the basis for their own praises and
thanksgivings, offered both corporately as they met together and privately.




Reconciliation Accomplished and Applied
(1:21–23)
Bibliography
In addition to the literature cited in the bibliography to chapter 1:15–20 the following are noted:
Dahl, N. A. ―Form-Critical Observations on Early Christian Preaching.‖ Jesus in the Memory of the
Early Church. Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1976, 30–36. Tachau, P. ―Einst‖ und ―Jetzt‖ im Neuen
Testament. Beobachtungen zu einem urchristlichen Predigtschema in der neutestamentlichen
Briefliteratur und zu seiner Vorgeschichte. FRLANT 105. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,
1972.

Translation
21
  You also, who once were alienated from God, hostile in mind and doing evil deeds, 22he
has now reconcileda in Christ‘s physical body through his death, in order to present you
holy, blameless and innocent in his sight—23 provided that you persevere in the faith,
established and firm, and not shifting away from the hope held out in the gospel. This is the
gospel that you heard and which has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and
of which I, Paul, have become a servant.

Notes
     a. The more difficult reading, the passive ajpokathllavghte (―you were reconciled‖),
which creates a harsh anacoluthon after uJma`" in verse 21, is followed by some textual
critics. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 622, notes that this reading which is attested by
diversified and early witnesses (B Hilary Ephraem and, in effect, P46 and 33) can account
for the rise of the other readings as attempts to mend the syntax of the sentence (cf.
Lightfoot and Lohmeyer).
On the other hand, Lohse (64) argues that preference ought to be given to ajpokathvllaxen,
the best attested textual reading (a
 A C Dc K g
         v syr, etc), which was altered at a very early stage to the passive so as to strengthen
the direct address to the community. Clearly the conflicting textual phenomena are difficult
to resolve.

Form/Structure/Setting
    This short section of three verses, situated between the hymn and Paul‘s statement
about his apostolic task, returns to the language of direct speech. The introductory words
kai; uJma`" (―and you‖), which are emphatic in both the original Greek and the English
translation, mark a new beginning in which the author interprets and applies statements of
the hymn to the readers.
    By means of a short, traditional rhetorical form (potev, ―once,‖ v 21; nuniv, ―now,‖ v 22)
a sharp contrast is drawn between the reader‘s pre-Christian and pagan past on the one
hand, and their present standing in Christ on the other (Tachau, Einst). The two contrasting
statements may be set out as follows (cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 43):
v. 21a
kai; uJma`":
pote o[nta"
ajphllotriwmevnou" …

b


ejn toi`" e[rgoi" …

22a

nuni; de;
ajpokathvllaxen

b


evn tw`/ dwvmati …

    A purpose clause—(v. 22c, commencing with parasth`sai, ―to present‖) is dependent
on the latter part of the potev-nuniv construction, thereby indicating why such a form has
been employed (see the exegetical notes below), while a lengthy conditional sentence with
its positive (v 23a, ei[ ge ejpimevnete …, ―provided that you continue …‖) and negative
formulations (v 23b–c, kai; mh; metakinouvmenoi …, ―and not moved …‖), which is a
demand to continue in the faith, rounds out the section.
    Three themes of the paragraph in praise of Christ (1:15–20) are taken up and related to
the readers: (a) the catchword ―to reconcile‖ (ajpokatallavxai, v. 20) in the words ―you
also … he has now reconciled‖ (ajpokathvllaxen, vv 21, 22), (b) this reconciliation has
been effected through Christ‘s death (compare v 20 with v 22), and (c) since Christ‘s rule
encompasses all things, for everything has been created in him (ejn aujtw`/ ejktivsqh ta;
pavnta, v 16), then the gospel is to be, indeed already has been, preached to every creature
under heaven (ejn pavsh/ th`/ uJpo; to;n oujranovn, v 23).
    There is a correspondence between verses 20b and 22b:


eijrhnopoihvsa" …

ajpokathvllaxen …

Further, the purpose of verse 22c (―to present you holy and without blemish and
unreprovable before him‖), expressed in cultic language, is akin to the petitionary prayer of
verse 10 (―to walk worthily of the Lord unto all pleasing‖). Zeilinger (Der Erstgeborene,
44) has also noted that the themes of faith, hope, hearing the gospel and its dynamic spread,
which have already appeared as significant theological themes in Paul‘s thanksgiving (vv
4–6) are reiterated at the conclusion of this short section (v
Comment
21. kai; uJma`". cf. Ephesians 2:1. The opening words, ―and you,‖ stand in an emphatic
position in Paul‘s sentence as he indicates that the central purpose in Christ‘s reconciling
work has to do with the Christian readers at Colossae. It is not simply that what has
occurred on a cosmic scale just happens to relate to them by way of application. Rather, this
congregation is designated as the ―goal‖ (Lohse, 62) toward which the event encompassing
heaven and earth is directed. It has special reference to them, designed to reconcile those
who were once alienated and at enmity with God, and to put them on a firm footing of faith
and hope.
    potev (v 21) … nuni; dev (v 22). By means of a short rhetorical form often employed in
primitive Christian proclamation (see Bultmann, Theology 1, 105, 106; Dahl, Jesus, 33; and
especially the full treatment by Tachau, Einst) a sharp contrast is drawn between the
readers‘ pre-Christian past and their present standing in Christ: ―you were once … but now
you are …‖ This schema appears almost exclusively in the epistolary literature of the N T
(though cf. Acts 17:30) and is found in doctrinal, paraenetic or personal contexts (Gal 1:23:
cf. 1 Tim 1:13; Philem 11). It is frequently employed by Paul (Rom 5:8–11; 7:5, 6;
11:30–32; 1 Cor 6:9–11; Gal 1:23; 4:3–7, 8–10; Col 2:13; 3:7) but is used by other NT
authors as well (1 Pet 2:10, 25; cf. Heb 12:26). The wonder of the salvation that has been
experienced is contrasted with the lost situation from which God has delivered them. The
past condition is mentioned first (potev) by either terms relating to sin (Rom 5:8–11; 7:5),
ethical practices, or alienation from God and his people (Col 1:21; Eph 2:1). However, the
gravity of their previous condition serves to magnify the wonder of God‘s mercy. The past
is recalled not because the emphasis falls upon it, but to draw attention to God‘s mighty
action—here in the reconciling death of his Son—on the readers‘ behalf. Their response
ought to be one of loving gratitude that shows itself in a determination to continue in the
faith (vv 22, 23).
    o[nta" ajphllotriwmevnou" … toi`" ponhroi`". Reconciliation, as we have seen with
reference to verse 20, presupposes estrangement. Paul therefore describes that former
condition of the Colossians in a threefold way. Tachau (Einst, 103) suggests that the latter
two statements, ―enemies in your mind‖ and ―doing evil deeds,‖ define more precisely in an
active way the meaning of the first, ―once you were alienated‖:
(a) o[nta" ajphllotriwmevnou". ―once you were alienated.‖ The perfect passive participle
means ―were estranged‖ (i.e. from God), while the addition of o[nta" expresses ―still more
forcibly the persistence of the … state of things‖ (BDF, para. 352; cf. Burton, para. 155).
The Colossians were once continuously and persistently out of harmony with God (cf. Eph
4:18 for the passive voice of the same verb), a statement that could only describe former
Gentiles (cf. Eph 2:12 where the estrangement is put in terms of relationships with God‘s
people: ―alienated [ajphllotriwmevnoi] from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to
the covenants of promise‖). As such they did not serve God; rather, they were enmeshed in
idolatry and slavery to sin.
    (b) ejcqrou;" th`/ dianoiva/. While the term ―enemy‖ is on occasion employed in a passive
sense meaning ―hated‖ (so Rom 11:28; cf. Bultmann, Theology 1, 286) here the word
ejcqroiv is best understood in an active sense (so Foerster, TDNT 2, 814) because of the
following th`/ dianoiva, to denote a conscious antagonism to the only true God, i.e. ―hostile
in mind.‖ As his opponents, they act in open enmity toward him with reference to their
thinking (th`/ dianoiva/ is probably a dative of reference; against Meyer, 309, who regards it
as a causal dative) and in their total conduct (ejn toi`" e[rgoi" ponhroi`"). The word ―mind‖
(diavnoia) which was a very common term in Greek prose was employed in the LXX usually
as a translation of , (―heart‖: Gen 8:21; 17:17; 24:45; 27:41; Exod 28:3, etc; cf. Behm,
TDNT 4, 965, for further references). Both it and the Greek kardiva (―heart‖) were often
related in the LXX (diavnoia was also used with reference to emotions [Lev 19:17; Isa 35:4],
acts of will [Exod 35:22, 26; Deut 29:17] or the totality of man‘s spiritual nature [Gen 8:21;
Deut 4:39]—just like kardiva), even interchangeable, and in the NT the two terms were
repeatedly employed together to designate the thinking and mentality of man (Luke 1:51;
Heb 8:10; 10:16; see Behm, TDNT 4, 966). This word ―mind‖ (dia;noia) can have either a
positive or a negative meaning depending on the context. Here it is clearly the latter
connotation which is in view: the Colossian Christians prior to their conversion were
estranged and hostile to God in their thinking, in their cast of mind (cf. Eph 2:3; 4:18).
     (c) ejn toi`" e[rgoi" toi`" ponhroi`". This kind of thinking naturally finds visible
expression in active behavior (Tachau, Einst, 103). Godlessness naturally leads to evil
actions. The expression ―evil work(s)‖ does not occur frequently in the NT (John 3:19; 7:7;
1 John 3:12; 2 John 11; also 2 Tim 4:18), although similar expressions are to be found: ―the
works of darkness‖ (e[rga tou` skovtou": Rom 13:12; Eph 5:11), ―the works of the flesh‖
(e[rga th`" sarkov": Gal 5:19) and ―dead works‖ (e[rga nekrav: Heb 6:1; 9:14, etc; cf.
Bertram, TDNT 2, 645, and Harder, TDNT 6, 557). These phrases denote the actions of the
unbelieving world, which belong to the ways of darkness rather than the ways of light, and
which ultimately lead to death. When living as unconverted Gentiles the readers had
offended God by their wicked ways, a term which, according to Martin (Lord, 56), suggests
a combination of idolatry and immorality (cf. Rom 1:18–32).
     22. nuni; de; ajpokathvllaxen. Having painted a grim picture of the Colossians‘
pre-Christian and pagan past Paul proceeds to describe the turning point when God acted
mightily on their behalf: ―now he has reconciled you.‖ There is a textual problem in the
word ―reconciled.‖ See earlier 64. However, the general sense is clear and on either reading
it is plain (i) that the Colossians have been reconciled to the one with whom they had
previously been at enmity (cf. Wolter, Rechtfertigung, 54, 59–62), (ii) that this could only
be achieved through divine intervention; and (iii) that attention is focused upon the crucial
event which marks the turning point for them, namely Christ‘s death.
At first sight the aorist tense pointing to Christ‘s death is rather surprising, for this would
suggest, if the time note is pressed, that the Colossians were reconciled to God long before
they were historically at enmity with him, or even born! The issue, however, is to be
understood in the light of Paul‘s eschatology, particularly his and the rest of the New
Testament‘s teaching on the two ages. Like the dying and rising with Christ motif, the verb
in the indicative is used to denote the decisive transfer of the believers from the old aeon to
the new which has taken place in the death of Christ (cf. R. C. Tannehill, Dying and Rising
with Christ. A Study in Pauline Theology [BZNW 32; Berlin: Töpelmann, 1967], 74). The
focus of attention here (as well as in the other ―once … now‖ passages) is not simply on
what took place in the historical experience of Christ, but also on what happened in the
actual life experience of these believers (see especially the discussion of R. B. Gaffin, The
Centrality of the Resurrection. A Study in Paul‘s Soteriology [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1978]
41–44). But clearly the death of Christ is the basis, the decisive event by which they are
reconciled (cf. Tachau, Einst, 114, 115).
     ejn tw`/ swvmati th`" sarko;" aujtou` dia; tou` qanavtou. God has reconciled us (so
Lohse, 64, and Martin, NCB, 67; against Bruce, 211, 212, and Ernst, 181) ―in his (sc.
Christ‘s) body of flesh, through his (this is the significance of the article tou`) death.‖ The
preposition ejn (―in‖) signifies not the place of death (see Dibelius-Greeven 22) but is
instrumental indicating that Christ‘s physical body (note the similar expression sw`ma th`"
sarkov" at 2:11 and the discussion 116, 117) was the means by which reconciliation was
effected (cf. Abbott, 226). The expression ―his body of flesh‖ appears to be rather heavy. It
was evidently a Hebraism meaning ―physical body‖ and has an exact verbal equivalent in
the Qumran literature (1QpHab 9:2: ―And they inflicted horrors of evil diseases and took
vengeance upon his (sc. the wicked priest‘s) body of flesh‖; for further examples in Greek
see Lohse, 64). The addition ―of flesh‖ (th`" sarkov") characterizes the body as the
physical body of Jesus which was subject to suffering (cf. R. H. Gundry,  in Biblical
Theology with Emphasis on Pauline Anthropology [SNTSMS 29; Cambridge: University
Press, 1976] 239), and it is quite likely that this ―insistence on the true incarnation of our
Lord was a necessary corrective to the tendency of the Colossian heresy‖ (Bruce, 212). The
whole phrase makes plain that the reconciliation of the Colossians was accomplished by
one who was truly incarnate (against a docetic understanding of Jesus‘ historical life) and
who really died (dia; tou` qanavtou; against a gnostic interpretation which glossed over his
death as unreal). ―The phrase is heavily loaded with polemical overtones‖ (Martin, NCB,
67).
parasth`sai uJma`" … God effected the reconciliation of the Colossians with a particular
end in view: to present them holy, blameless and irreproachable before him. (It is possible
that the aorist infinitive parasth`sai may look back to eujdovkhsen, i.e. ―it was his good
pleasure … to present you,‖ but the nearer verb ajpokathvllaxen, assuming this is the
correct reading, because of its closer proximity and the break at v(v) 21, ―and you,‖ is the
more likely.) Cultic terminology is employed in this statement. So the words ―holy‖
(a{gio") and ―blameless‖ (a[mwmo") are used to describe the unblemished animals set apart
for God as OT sacrifices (LXX of Exod 29:37, 38; cf. Heb 9:14; 1 Pet 1:19). Furthermore, the
verb parasth`sai (―to present‖) was, on occasion, employed of presenting a sacrifice
(Rom 12:1; cf. Lev 16:7; see BAG, 633). Lightfoot therefore concluded that these
expressions, together with the prepositional phrase katenwvpion aujtou` (―before him‖),
pointed to the bringing of the Colossians in the here and now as sacrifices into God‘s
presence for approval. God is thus regarded not as a judge but as the ―examiner‖
(mwmoskovpo") who inspects the sacrifices to make sure they are unblemished (Lightfoot,
160, 161).
     It is doubtful, however, whether thoughts of sacrifice are really present in this clause at
all. The last term ―irreproachable‖ (ajnevgklhto"), which probably determines the meaning
of the other two (so Abbott, 229), does not belong to the context of cultic statements. It was
a judicial word (which came to be used in everyday speech more generally, as the papyri
show: cf. MM, 40, 41) denoting a person or thing against which there could be no e[gklhma
and which was ―free from reproach,‖ ―without stain‖ (Grundmann, TDNT 1, 356, 357).
Likewise the verb parasth`sai (―to present‖) was often employed in legal language with
the meaning ―to bring another before the court‖ (some take 1 Cor 8:8, and 2 Cor 4:14 in
this way; cf. 2 Cor 11:2; Rom 14:10; 2 Tim 2:15). If the judicial overtones are present in the
clause then Paul is asserting that the purpose of God‘s work of reconciling the readers
through Christ‘s death was that they should be irreproachable when they finally stand
before him (cf. Rom 14:10). As men and women who are forgiven and reconciled they are
declared blameless (cf. Rom 8:33, 34), without fault or stain (the terms ―holy‖ and
―blameless‖ appear to have lost any cultic overtones at Eph 1:4; 5:27; Phil 2:15; Jude 24)
on the occasion of the Great Assize. At 1 Corinthians 1:8 where the same word
ajnevgklhto" points to the irreproachability of the Corinthians (cf. O‘Brien, Introductory
Thanksgivings, 126–30) the Parousia is mentioned explicitly: ―on the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ.‖ The same time note is meant here with the phrase ―before him‖ (katenwvpion
aujtou`, cf. Hegermann, Schöpfungsmittler, 194, 196; there is no justification within this
context for the view of D. M. Stanley, Christ‘s Resurrection in Pauline Soteriology [AnBib
13; Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1961] 209, that: ―Paul is probably thinking of the
presentation of the Colossian church in the Eucharistic liturgy‖!). These words of verse 22
prepare the way for a similar understanding of Paul‘s aim in his ministry, namely ―to
present (parasthvswmen, the same verb, appears) every man perfect in Christ,‖ verse 28,
i.e. acceptable to God at his tribunal on the final day (Rom 14:10). God‘s work of
reconciliation in Christ had as its goal the fitness and preparedness of his people for the
Parousia. Paul‘s ministry, in which he worked mightily, had the same aim in view—the
ultimate perfection of the Colossians in Christ.
     23. A lengthy conditional sentence with its positive (v 23a) and negative (v 23b–c)
formulations, setting forth a demand to continue in the faith, rounds out the section.
     ei[ ge. The prospect of the Colossians‘ standing irreproachable before him at the Great
Assize is conditional upon their remaining firmly founded and established in the faith. The
Greek construction ei[ ge, translated ―provided that,‖ does not express doubt. Although the
same expression in Galatians 3:4 may leave ―a loophope for doubt‖ (J. B. Lightfoot, The
Epistle of Paul to the Galatians, 2nd American reprint edition. Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 1957, 135), the other Pauline references (2 Cor 5:3; Eph 3:2; 4:21 and Rom 5:6,
if the text of B is followed) according to Lightfoot (161), Thrall (Particles, 87, 88, 90) and
Martin (Lord, 58, 59) would appear from their contexts to denote confidence. So the words
in this sentence may be paraphrased: ―At any rate if you stand firm in the faith—and I am
sure that you will,‖ words with which Thrall (Particles, 88) rightly compares chapter 2:5,
―rejoicing to see your order and the firm stability of your faith in Christ.‖ But continuance
is the test of reality. If it is true that the saints will persevere to the end, then it is equally
true that the saints must persevere to the end. And one of the means which the apostle uses
to insure that his readers within the various congregations of his apostolic mission do not
fall into a state of false security is to stir them up with warnings such as this.
ejpimevnete th`/ pivstei teqemeliwmejnoi kai; eJdrai`oi. The call is to steadfastness in the
face of the danger of being drawn away from the apostolic gospel. ejpimevnw with the dative
case is used figuratively several times by Paul, meaning ―continue,‖ ―persist (in),‖
―persevere‖ (cf. Rom 6:1; 11:22, 23; 1 Tim 4:16). ―The faith‖ in this context is another
description for the apostolic gospel rather than the subjective response of the Colossians to
that gospel.
     Paul‘s terms ―stable and steadfst‖ (teqemeliwmevnoi kai; eJdrai`oi) are metaphors of
strength and security used in connection with a house (cf. Matt 7:24–27). Both the
foundation (the noun qemevlion is akin to this verb) ought to be well established and the
structure firm (eJdrai`o"). In the OT the verb ―establish‖ (qemeliovw) was used to describe:
(a) God‘s founding activity in creation (LXX Pss 8:4: 23:2; 101:26; Isa 48:13; 51:13, 16;
etc), and (b) the establishing of his city on Mt. Zion (LXX Ps 47:9; Isa 14:32; 44:28; Hag
2:18; Zech 4:9; 8:9; etc; see Lohmeyer, 72, and Lohse, 66). The Qumran community
regarded itself as God‘s house (1QS 5:6; 7:17; 8:7, 8; 9:5, 6; 1QH 6:25–27; 7:8, 9; see O.
Betz, ―Felsenmann und Felsengemeinde [Eine Parallele zu Mt 16:17–19 in den
Qumranpsalmen],‖ ZNW 48 [1957] 49–77, for further examples cf. B. Gärtner, The Temple
and the Community in Qumran and the New Testament [SNTSMS 1; Cambridge: University
Press, 1965] 16–46, and R. J. McKelvey, The New Temple. The Church in the New
Testament [OTM 3; Oxford: University Press, 1969] 46–53). The NT writers often take up
the thought of the Christian community as a holy building of God (sometimes specifically
the temple: 1 Cor 3:10, 11, 17; Eph 2:20; 1 Tim 3:15; 1 Pet 2:4–10; cf. Matt 16:17–19),
stressing different motifs: e.g. the unity of the building, its holiness, it is the place where
God‘s Spirit dwells, and so on. That community as God‘s building has a sure foundation,
Jesus Christ (1 Cor 3:10, 11; Eph 2:20; 2 Tim 2:19), and as a house is erected with strong
supports and buttresses (cf. 1 Tim 3:15 where the cognate eJdraivwma points to the local
congregation as the ―bulwark‖ of the tvuth). Paul‘s summons to steadfastness is needed in
time of discouragement and stress (Martin, NCB, 68; cf. 1 Cor 15:58) and reappears in
Christian vocabulary when the church has to withstand the attacks of heretics (Ignatius Ign.
Eph. 10:2, perhaps echoing the words in Colossians, ―Be steadfast in the faith‖; Polycarp
Phil. 10:1).
kai; mh; metakinouvmenoi. The same idea is now put negatively (according to Winer, para.
55.1a the use of mhv implies that this clause is conditioned by the preceding; cf. Abbott,
227), though it is defined more precisely by the following words: ―not constantly shifting
(present tense) from the hope of the gospel.‖ The verb metakinevw, meaning ―shift,‖
―remove,‖ is used figuratively (in the OT there are several places where it means ―be put to
flight,‖ e.g. LXX Deut 32:30) as Paul calls his readers not to shift from the fixed ground of
the Christian hope—that hope which was the content of the gospel (eujaggelivou is a
subjective genitive).
    tou` khrucqevnto"…uJpo; to;n oujranovn. As the themes of reconciliation and the saving
significance of Christ‘s death are taken up from the hymn of verses 15–20 and applied to
the readers, so too the note of universalism is reiterated. Paul has already said that the
gospel was ―bearing fruit and increasing in all the world‖ (1:6). He now asserts that, since
Christ‘s rule in both creation and reconciliation encompasses all things (v(v) 15–20), the
gospel which announces that lordship is directed to the whole world (cf. H. Kasting, Die
Anfänge der urchristlichen Mission. Eine historische Untersuchung [BEvT 55; Munich:
Kaiser, 1969] 138, 139). In fact, it has already been preached (khrucqevnto") to every
creature (ejn signifies the location where the preaching takes place: Matt 3:1; 11:1; 24:14;
Acts 9:20; Gal 2:2; while havsh/ ktivsei here means ―all humankind‖: a similar phrase
occurs at Mark 16:15 in the context of world mission, cf. Foerster, TDNT 3, 1029;
Schweizer, 78; the expression ujpo; to;n oujranovn does not appear elsewhere in Paul but
accords well with the Greek OT: Gen 1:9; 6:17; 7:19; Exod 17:14; etc). But in what sense
has the gospel of hope been proclaimed to all humankind? It certainly does not mean that
every individual has heard the message. Nor, on the other hand, do we agree with
Dibelius-Greeven (22) that the statement is to be regarded as a rhetorical exaggeration.
Rather, along the lines of chapter 1:6 Paul has particularly in mind cities and towns from
which the gospel moved further afield (see above 13).
    Also, by referring to the universal scope of the gospel, Paul shows it is the authentic
message. ―The catholicity of the gospel is a token of its divine origin and power‖ (Bruce,
213). It stands in stark contrast to the heretical teaching with its appeal to a select group of
initiates (cf. Masson, 109).
     ou| ejgenovmhn ejgw; Pau`lo" diavkono". Having begun his thanksgiving report at verse 3
with the plural ―we give thanks‖—so writing on behalf of Timothy and perhaps others as
well as himself—Paul now wishes to emphasize his own ministry as closely bound up with
God‘s gracious plan for the world and so he emphatically turns to the singular: ―of which
(sc. gospel) I, Paul, became a minister.‖
     It has been argued by some recent interpreters (notably Käsemann, Essays, 166, 167,
and Lohse, 67) that when the title ―minister of the gospel‖ is here applied to Paul it is the
voice of the subapostolic age looking back to him as the guarantor of the apostolic office.
So a later generation is in these words asserting that the Pauline gospel has binding validity
because of its apostolic character. But such a reading of the situation fails to come to grips
with: (a) the glaring omission of the significant term ―apostle‖ (ajpovstolo") which would
have uniquely served this supposed intention of the post-Pauline writer (cf. Ernst, 182, and
Martin NCB, 68, 69), (b) the fact that Paul, in his major letters, uses the word diavkono" of
himself, as well as his colleagues, particularly when he wishes to stress that both he and
they are on the same footing as servants through whom God works (notably 1 Cor 3:5).
That the phrase ―minister of the gospel‖ does not occur in the chief Pauline letters is of no
real significance since it is clear in these epistles that such ministers are servants of the
Word who preach and teach the gospel anyway (cf. 2 Cor 3:6 with 2:17 and 4:2; note Ellis,
NTS 17 [1970–71] 441–45).
Rather, Paul appears to be making a different point in this context, namely that the message
which focuses on the lordship of Christ and the reconciliation wrought by him is the mighty
gospel of which he has been privileged to become a servant. He of all people has become a
minister of that gospel. In the wider context of the letter by styling himself a diavkono" Paul
is demonstrating that he is on the same level as Epaphras and Tychicus (1:7; 4:7), his
trusted fellow-workers (cf. 1 Cor 3:5) who are thereby commended as true exponents of that
gospel at Colossae.

Explanation
    The message of Christ‘s peace-making work, which involves the reconciliation of the
cosmos, has particular reference to the Colossian Christians. These readers who are now
addressed directly (v 21, ―and you‖) are reminded of their pre-Christian past when they
were enemies, alienated from God and his people. The gravity of their previous situation
sets in bolder relief God‘s gracious and mighty action of reconciling them to himself. That
reconciliation which was effected in history at great cost—the death of his Son on the
cross—had as its goal the fitness and preparedness of his people for the final day when they
will stand before him.
Continuance, however, is the test of the reality of their faith. Like a building set on a sure
foundation and erected with strong supports and buttresses they are to remain true to the
gospel, and not to shift from the fixed ground of their Christian hope. The claim of Paul‘s
gospel (which focused on this hope) to be the authentic message is attested by its universal
appeal. No class or group is to be excluded from hearing it since it speaks of Jesus‘ lordship
in creation and redemption. In fact, this message about God‘s plan for the world, which
Paul is privileged to serve as a minister, has already been preached in towns and cities of
the empire and is well on the way to being proclaimed throughout the Mediterranean world.
Paul’s Mission and Pastoral Concern
(1:24–2:5)
Bibliography
Bandstra, A. J. Dimensions, 329–43. Bauckham, R. J. ―Colossians 1:24 Again: The Apocalyptic
Motif.‖ EvQ 47 (1975) 168–70. Bowers, W. P. ―A Note on Colossians 1:27a.‖ Current Issues in
Biblical and Patristic Interpretation. Studies in Honor of Merrill C. Tenney Presented by His
Former Students, ed. G. F. Hawthorne. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1975, 110–14. Brown, R. E. The
Semitic Background of the Term ―Mystery‖ in the New Testament. FBBS 21. Philadelphia: Fortress,
1968. Dahl, N. A. Jesus, 30–36. Kamlah, E. ―Wie beurteilt Paulus sein Leiden? Ein Beitrag zur
Untersuchung seiner Denkstruktur.‖ ZNW 54 (1963) 217–32. Kremer, J. Was an den Leiden Christi
noch mangelt. Eine interpretationsgeschichtliche und exegetische Untersuchung zu Kol. 1, 24b.
BBB 12. Bonn: Hanstein, 1956. Lührmann, D. Das Offenbarungsverständnis bei Paulus und in
paulinischen Gemeinden. WMANT 16. Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener, 1965. Montague, G. T.
Growth in Christ, 81–85. Pfitzner, V. C. Paul and the Agon Motif. NovTSup 16. Leiden: Brill,
1967. Reumann, J. ―OIKONOMIA—Terms in Paul in Comparison with Lucan Heilsgeschichte.‖
NTS 13 (1966–67) 147–67. Trudinger, L. P. ―A Further Brief Note on Colossians 1:24.‖ EvQ 45
(1973) 36–38. Yates, R. ―A Note on Colossians 1:24.‖ EvQ 42 (1970) 88–92. Zeilinger, F. Der
Erstgeborene, 44–49, 82–115.

Translation
        24
           Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and I fill up in my flesh what is still
      lacking in regard to Christ‘s afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church. 25I
      have become its minister in accordance with the commission God gave me concerning
      you to preach the word of God fully and effectively—26 the mystery that was kept secret
      for ages and generations, but has now been disclosed to the saints. 27To them God
      chose to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is
      Christ in you, the hope of glory. 28We proclaim him, warning and teaching everyone
      with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in Christ. 29To this end I
      labor, striving with all the energy he so powerfully works in me.
2:1
    I want you to know how greatly I strive for you, for those at Laodicea, and for all who
have not met me personally. 2My purpose is that they may be strengthened in heart and
instructed in love, so that they may have the whole wealth of full understanding and thus
know the mystery of God, namely Christ, 3in whom all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge have been stored up. 4I am saying this in order that no one may deceive you
with persuasive language. 5For even if I am absent from you in body, I am present with you
in spirit, and I rejoice to see your orderly life and the stability of your faith in Christ.

Form/Structure/Setting
    Paul‘s statement that he is the servant of the gospel (vv 23) provides the transition to
this following section in which he describes his suffering as an apostle and its relationship
to his God-given task (v 24, 25). His message is the public proclamation of the mystery,
now revealed, which focuses on Christ as the hope of the Gentiles (v 26, 27). As apostle,
therefore, he works energetically, seeking systematically to teach and warn everyone with
the aim of presenting everyone perfect in Christ (vv 28, 29). This activity, in which he
engages on a universal scale, particularly applies to the congregations at Colossae and
elsewhere in the Lycus valley where he was unknown. Because of his commission Paul is
able to instruct and strengthen these Christians (2:1–5).
    The whole paragraph which deals with Paul‘s ministry to the churches (1:24–2:5) may
be divided into two sections: 1:24–29 and 2:1–5. While there are one or two instances of
parallelism (which are noted below) the sentences in both sections cannot be divided easily.
In the first paragraph Paul begins with the first person singular (caivrw, ajntanaplhrw` v
24), changes to the plural at v 28 (hjmei`" kataggevllomen), and then reverts to the singular
in the last verse (kopiw` ajgwnizovmeno", v 29).
V 24 may be divided into two parts of unequal length, each of which commences with a
finite verb in the first person singular (caivrw … ajntanaplhrw`) and is then followed by
prepositional phrases commencing with ejn (ejn toi`" haqhvmasin … ejn th`/ sarkiv mou) and
uvpevr (uJpe`r uJmw`n … ujpevr tou` swvmato" a[tou`). The additional words in the second half,
however, mean that the sentence is not perfectly balanced.
    Zeilinger (Der Erstgeborene, 44–46) understands the paragraph in a circular fashion
with the twofold statement of the mystery (v 25d–27) at the center and items 1, 5, and 2, 4
corresponding:
                1.   The suffering of the apostle (v 24)
                2.   The apostle‘s task (v 25a–c)
                3.   The mystery (vv 25d–27)
                4.   The carrying owt of the task (v 28)
                5.   The toil and labor of the apostle (v 29).
     Such a division, however, is a little too neat, for although Zeilinger‘s headings are apt
enough there is not the circular correspondence he suggests.
     The second section is made up of three sentences of unequal length: the first extends to
verse 3, the second comprises verse 4, the third verse 5. Commencing with a well-known
literary form ―I want you to know‖ (qevlw … uJma`" eijdevnai) Paul indicates how great is the
conflict in which he is engaged on behalf of the Colossians and others:


hjlivkon ajgw`na e[cw

uJpe;r ujmw`n

kai; tw`n ejn Laodikei;a/

kai; o{soi oujc eJovrakan to; provswpovn mou ejn sarkiv.
    The purpose of this strenuous effort is indicated by means of a i{na clause (v 2), which
then leads on to a further statement about the mystery which is centered on Christ. A
relative clause (ejn w\/ expands this indicating that in him alone exist ―wisdom‖ and
―knowledge‖ (v 3). A warning note is sounded (tou`to levgw) so that (i{na) the community
may not be led astray by the high-sounding words of the deceivers (v 4). The danger to the
congregation is a serious one. Paul is distant. He cannot be on hand to speak directly to the
community but he is present with it in spirit—note the synthetic parallelism of verse 5a and
b:


ejn gavr kai` th`/ sarki; a{peimi

ajllaj tw`/ pneuvmati su;n uJmi`n ekjmi.

Finally, by means of two participles (caivrwm, blevpwn) Paul indicates he is pleased with the
Colossians‘ orderly Christian life and the stability of their fait

Comment
    24. This verse has been an exegetical crux since earliest times as Kremer (Leiden
Christi) has shown in his history of the exegesis of the passage. It appears to express ideas
that go beyond Paul‘s statements elsewhere and which seem to have no parallel in the rest
of the NT. Several questions immediately arise: What are Paul‘s sufferings and how can they
be an occasion for rejoicing? In what sense can these sufferings be for the body of Christ
(ujpe;r tou` swvmato" aujtou`), or for the Colossians (uJpe;r ujmw`n), a congregation which he
had neither evangelized nor visited? Then, what is meant by the phrase ―Christ‘s
afflictions‖? How can it be meaningfully said that something is ―lacking‖ in these
afflictions, and in what way can Paul (or other Christians if it applies to them) fill this
deficiency? We shall endeavor to answer these questions in the exegesis that follows.
nu`n caivrw ejn toi`" paqhvmasin uJpe;r uJmw`n. Having spoken about the worldwide
preaching of the gospel of which he has been privileged to become a servant (v 23), Paul
states that he rejoices in his sufferings for the Colossians. By using the first person singular,
―I rejoice‖ (caivrw), which naturally follows on from verse 23, he contrasts the previous
plurals ―we give thanks‖ (eujcaristou`men,v 3) and ―we do not cease to pray for you‖ (ouj
pauovmeqa u;pevr uJmw`n proseucovmenoi, v 9). What follows, then, has particular reference
to him. The ―now‖ (nu`n) points not so much to Paul‘s actual imprisonment (as Abbott, 228,
and Masson, 109, suppose), which is not specifically mentioned until chapter 4:3, but to the
present time when Christ‘s lordship is proclaimed universally in the gospel and when he,
Paul, is privileged to suffer as a servant of that gospel and for the Colossians.
    The word pavquhma, meaning ―suffering,‖ ―affliction,‖ or ―misfortune,‖ was used from
the time of the Greek tragedians onward to denote that which befell a man and had to be
accepted by him. The term does not appear in the LXX (though kindred words such as
pavscw do) while in the NT (apart from Heb 2:9) it is always used in the plural (for details
see Michaelis, TDNT 5, 930–35). Apart from the rare meaning of ―passion,‖ ―impulse‖ (at
Gal 5:24; Rom 7:5) its usual sense is ―suffering‖ (Rom 8:18; 2 Cor 1:5–7; Phil 3:10; Col
1:24; 2 Tim 3:11; Heb 2:9, 10; 10:32; 1 Pet 1:11; 4:13; 5:1–9). Paul uses the word to
designate the afflictions in which all Christians participate as part of the sufferings of Christ
(Rom 8:18; 2 Cor 1:5–7; cf. Phil 3:10). Here, however, because of the context ejn toi`"
paqhvmasin refers to Paul‘s own sufferings (some manuscripts, a
    3
       81 etc, add mou, ―my,‖ but the meaning is plain enough without this explanatory
addition; the definite article denotes the sufferings actually experienced, the ones Paul
knows about), bound up with the special significance of his calling to minister to Gentiles
through the world-wide preaching of the gospel (cf. Bauckham, EvQ 47 [1975] 168–70). So
we note the emphatic singulars (―I rejoice,‖ ―I fill up‖) and the references to his ministry as
a servant (vv 23, 25) deriving from the particular stewardship given to him by God (v 25),
the content of which was to fulfill the word of God, i.e. the mystery (vv 25, 26).
    Elsewhere Paul refers to suffering (by various terms including qli`yi", ajsqevneia, etc;
see Kamlah, ZNW [1963] 217–32, and Schweizer, 81–86, and the literature cited there) as
integral to his apostolic ministry (1 Cor 4:9–13; 2 Cor 11:23–33; 12:9, 10; 13:4 and Gal
6:17) and as such it was tied in with the clear proclamation of the gospel (2 Cor 4:4–6 with
vv 7–18; 5:18–21 with 6:1–11; cf. 1 Thess 1:5, 6; 3:3, 4 and Acts 14:22). For him the
conjunction of suffering with his apostolic ministry of the gospel was no new thing; he had
been forewarned by Christ at the very beginning when he was called to preach him among
the Gentiles: ―I will show him how much he must suffer [note the dei` of divine necessity]
for the sake of my name‖ (Acts 9:16).
Second Corinthians 1:3–11 provides an important parallel to Colossians 1:24 for in both
passages the terms qli`Yi" and pavqhma appear. In the former paragraph where Paul tells
the Corinthians of the excruciating nature of his affliction (qli`yi") in Asia (v 8), he
indicates that this sort of distress he experiences (v 4, ejpi; pavsh/ th`/ ulivyei hjmw`n; v 6,
qlibovmema) is part and parcel of the sufferings of the Messiah (ta; paqhvmata rou`
Cristou`, v 5). The Corinthians too share in the same messianic woes (vv 6, 7) even though
the precise nature of their affliction was different from that of Paul (for a more detailed
treatment see O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings, 244–50). At Colossians 1:24 the two
terms ―sufferings‖ paqhvmata) and ―afflictions‖ (qlivyei"), though synonymous, are
reversed. The former denotes the sufferings actually experienced by Paul in his apostolic
labors; the latter is employed in the enigmatic phrase ―the afflictions of Christ‖ (aij qlivyi"
tou` Cristou`), the meaning of which is discussed below.
    The words uJpe;r uJmw`n (―for your sake‖; on the meaning of uJpevr see BDF, para. 231)
have occasioned some difficulty (how could Paul‘s sufferings be for a congregation which
he had neither evangelized nor visited?) and so have been connected with the verb caivrw:
―I rejoice … over you.‖ But the phrase uJpe;r uJmw`n naturally attaches to ejn toi`"
paqhvmasin to mean ―(I rejoice) in my sufferings for your sake,‖ with particular reference
to the Colossian Christians (Moule, 79, claims that the words ―for your sake,‖ while strictly
applying to the Colossians or the Lycus valley churches must not be confined to them since
they are representative of others; this is possible though the uJma`" naturally follows on from
the second person plurals of vv 21–23 [―you were alienated … but now he has reconciled
you,‖ etc], and these certainly apply to the Colossians and other Lycus valley Christians.
More significant for Moule‘s contention is that uJpe;r uJmw;n is parallelled by uJpevr tou`
swvmato" auJtou` The wider reference is to be seen in this latter phrase, not the former).
    The first clause (v 24a) does not state in what way Paul‘s sufferings are for the
Colossians (uJpevr uJmw`n). This issue can only be settled by reference to the following words
(v 24b) which clarify and explain more closely the meaning of verse 24a (the kaiv is
explicative: so Lohse, 69, and Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 83):
    kaiv ajntanaplhrw` ta; uJsterhvmata tw`n qliyewn tou` Cristou` ktl This may be
translated literally as: ―And in my flesh I complete what is lacking in Christ‘s afflictions for
the sake of his body, that is, the church.‖ The significance of the statement is by no means
clear and it has occasioned a considerable amount of comment and discussion. Our method
will be to examine the critical phrases in the clause, noting several alternative
interpretations, before suggesting the lines along which we judge the meaning is to be
sought.
    ta; uJsterhvmata tw`n qliyewn tou` Criotou`. The Greek may be rendered by ―what is
lacking in Christ‘s afflictions,‖ and the following are some of the more significant
interpretations (cf. Kremer, Leiden Christi) that have been suggested:
    (1) H. Windisch (Paulus und Christus. Ein biblisch-religionsgeschichtlicher Vergleich.
[Leipzig: Heinrich, 1934] 236–50) took the phrase to mean that there was still something
lacking in the vicarious sufferings of Christ which must be supplied by the apostle. Paul
bore away the sufferings ―which Christ could not carry away completely‖ (244). This view
has been largely abandoned by recent scholars, and with good reasons. Paul, like the other
NT writers, regarded the death of Jesus as the means by which reconciliation was truly and
uniquely accomplished. To go no further than Colossians itself Paul states that because of
Christ‘s death on the cross all our trespasses have been forgiven (2:13, 14; cf. 1:12–14,
19–22). In addition to this, it has been correctly pointed out by Staab, Schweizer and others
that nowhere else in the NT is the phrase ―Christ‘s afflictions‖ used of his redemptive act or
general experience of suffering. Instead, Paul uses the concepts ―blood,‖ ―cross‖ and
―death‖ to refer to that act of redemption.
(2) A popular view in seventeenth and eighteenth century Protestant interpretation was to
understand the genitive tou` Cristou` as objective (or as a genitivus auctoris) so that the
phrase meant suffering ―for the sake of Christ.‖ It was argued that this was consistent with
Pauline thought (cf. 2 Cor 4:10, 11), while Acts 9:16 records how much Paul will suffer for
the sake of Christ‘s name. So, with this perspective, the exegetical difficulties are said to
disappear. Paul is not speaking of completing or filling up the sufferings of Jesus; instead,
he is suffering for Christ‘s sake. The difficulty with this approach, however, is that it does
not really explain the phrase ―what is lacking‖ (ta; uJsterhvmata), nor does it indicate how
the apostle can ―fill up‖ these sufferings.
    (3) Another line of approach that was popular among some early interpreters was to
understand tou` Cristou` as a genitive of quality referring to the sufferings of Paul ―which
resemble those of Christ.‖ Greek commentators such as Photius and Theodoret adopted this
line as did Pelagius on the Latin side, and it appears to have been revived during the
nineteenth century by Meyer, von Soden and Abbott. Paul‘s sufferings were similar to the
distresses experienced by Christ; Christ‘s afflictions ―are regarded as the type of all those
that are endured by His followers on behalf of the church (Abbott, 232). But again it may
be asked: In what sense can one meaningfully speak of a lack in Christ‘s afflictions, and
how is Paul able to remedy such a deficiency?
    (4) A fourth approach which has been very influential in times past is the
Christ-mysticism view. All that Paul does and suffers happens in mystical union with
Christ (cf. Gal 2:20). The ―afflictions of Christ‖ are those sufferings experienced in
mystical fellowship with him. Deissmann and Schmid, two exponents of this theory, held
that the words applied to Paul alone, while Schneider and Dibelius thought they referred to
the whole church. Advocates of the Christ-mysticism approach considered that Paul could
write in this way without bringing into question or reducing the suffering of Christ on earth.
This mystic union with Christ in his dying and resurrection (supposedly supported by Phil
3:10) in some way or other conferred a benefit on the church. Lohmeyer‘s criticisms
(76–79; cf. Percy, Probleme, 128–34) of this view, however, are still trenchant. He finds
difficulty with the word uJsterhvmata (―what is lacking‖) claiming that in ―a ‗mystical
suffering in accordance with Christ‘ either the entire suffering of Christ is present and
‗what is lacking‘ is never perceptible, or else the personal suffering of faith remains
separate from the exemplary sufferings of Christ‖ (Lohmeyer, 77; cf. Lohse, 69, 70). In
other words, it seems incomprehensible how, in the light of this intimate communion of
suffering, there could be a measure of afflictions which still lacked something.
(5) Clearly any satisfactory explanation of the passage (as Best, Body, 136, notes) must take
the words tav uJsterhvmata seriously without suggesting that Christ‘s sufferings were
insufficient to redeem, and explain why Paul‘s sufferings can be linked with those of the
Messiah, at the same time indicating why he should rejoice in his sufferings for the sake of
Colossians. Several scholars (including Best, Body, 136, Moule, 76, Lohse, 70–72, Martin,
NCB, 70, and Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 82–94; note, however, the criticisms of Ernst,
184, 185) consider a more fruitful line of inquiry into the meaning of ―Christ‘s afflictions‖
is the OT and Jewish background with its apocalyptic conception of the afflictions of the
end time, the woes of the Messiah. The presence of the definite article ―the afflictions of
Christ‖ (tw`n qlivyewn tou` Cristou`) suggests a definite or well-known entity such as the
birth-pangs of the Messiah (cf. Kremer, Leiden Christi, 168). Since the immediate context
contains references to other concepts which have an apocalyptic ring (the mystery
previously hidden but now revealed, v 26; ―the riches of the glory of this mystery,‖ v 27;
―God‘s mystery,‖ 2:2; and ―in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
hidden,‖ 2:3) it is considered that the attempt to find such associations in this disputed
phrase is appropriate.
     The term qhi`yi" (―affliction‖) which stands in the LXX for several Hebrew terms that
more or less denote the distresses of life in various nuances gained its theological
significance from the fact that it predominantly signified ―the oppression and affliction of
the people of Israel or of the righteous who represent Israel‖ (Schlier, TDNT 3, 142; cf.
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 84). Israel constantly experienced ―affliction‖ (qhi`yi") in its
history, for example, the oppression in Egypt and the affliction of the exile, both important
events of salvation history (Exod 4:31; Deut 4:29; 28:47–68; Judg 6:9; 10:6–16; 1 Sam
10:18, 19; 2 Kings 19:3), while the righteous in Israel, according to the Psalms, were
afflicted too (Pss 9:10; 12:5; 22:5; 31:7; 33:7, 18, etc). In addition to this continual
visitation of the chosen people by God, according to Daniel 12:1 there belongs also a future
hjmevra qlivyew" (―There is going to be a time of great distress, unparalleled since nations
first came into existence,‖ JB; cf. Hab 3:16; Zeph 1:15). So Schlier (TDNT 3, 142) concludes:
―The judgment fulfilled in the history of Israel will be totally revealed in the eschatological
qli`yi".‖
     Jewish apocalyptic writing, with its doctrine of the two ages (―the present age‖ and ―the
coming age‖), frequently pictured the disasters and catastrophes coming upon the world (cf.
Dan 12:1) as a prelude to the end-time which would usher in the coming anointed ruler of
God. Plagues, war, famine and the like will fall upon mankind, and even God‘s people will
be called upon to suffer (for examples see Str-B 4, 977–86). When these horrors and cosmic
disorders reach their climax, their appointed limit, the advent will come. The afflictions of
these last days are called the ―woes of the Messiah‖ (Hebrew  = hJ wjdi;n
tou` Cristou` [cf. Matt 24:8; Mark 13:8; Paul‘s expression aiJ qlivyei" tou` Cristou`, ―the
afflictions of the Christ/Messiah,‖ is synonymous and equivalent) as they immediately
precede the arrival of the anointed ruler of God. They are the travail out of which the
messianic age is born. God has set a limit to these sufferings, prescribing a definite measure
for the afflictions which the righteous and the martyrs must endure (1 Enoch 47:1–4; 2
Baruch 30:2).
     The NT’s teaching concerning the end-time is not unrelated to these Jewish apocalyptic
conceptions. God has set the measure and extent of these afflictions, thereby limiting them
(Mark 13:19–24 and parallels). However, the NT significantly modifies this apocalyptic
concept of the messianic woes: (a) it is not some unknown figure who will appear at the
advent: it will be the Son of Man on the clouds of heaven who is none other than the
crucified and risen Lord Jesus. The sorrows to be endured will usher in his glorious
appearing for judgment and salvation. (b) With the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus
Christ the ―coming age‖ has been inaugurated. The present age continues so that Christians
live in the overlap of the two aeons. The woes of the Messiah, the afflictions of Christ, have
already begun and when their appointed limit has been reached the coming age will be
consummated and this present evil age will pass away.
All Christians participate in these sufferings; through them they enter the kingdom of God
(Acts 14:22; cf. 1 Thess 3:3, 7). Suffering with Christ is a necessary prerequisite to being
glorified with him (Rom 8:17, ei[per sumpavscomen i{na kaiv sundoxasqew`men). But
none of these afflictions is able to separate the believer from the love of God in Christ Jesus
(Rom 8:38, 39). They ultimately lead to hope and glory (Rom 5:3), and there is the
assurance given that such afflictions of the present time (Rom 8:18, ta; pauqvmata tou` nu`n
kairou`) are not worth comparing with that glory to be revealed.
     ajntanaplhrw` ta; uJterhvmata … The term uJstevrhma (―need,‖ ―want,‖ ―deficiency,‖
BA 849; cf. Wilckens, TDNT 8, 592–601) was used of the absence of a person to whom
    G,

one is attached (1 Cor 16:7; Phil 2:30), and of a deficiency in a specific situation (1 Thess
3:10). The presence of the definite article tav suggests the phrase ―what is lacking in
Christ‘s afflictions‖ refers to something well-known (so Lohse, 71; Zeilinger, Der
Erstgeborene, 89) and agrees with the apocalyptic notion of a definite measure of affliction
to be endured in the last days. As God had set a definite measure in time (cf. 4 Ezra 4:36,
37; Gal 4:4) and the limit of the tribulations at the end (cf. Mark 13:5–27) so there is a
definite measure of suffering that is to be filled up. That limit of the messianic woes has not
yet been reached. There are still deficiencies (ta; uJsterhvmata) which Paul through his
sufferings is in the process of completing.
     Though the precise significance of ajntiv in the verb ajntanaplhrovw (―complete‖) is not
certain (it has been taken to mean ―in quick succession,‖ or ―instead,‖ ―for someone else‖
[cf. BAG, 72]; Lightfoot, 162, 163, after a comparison of classical and Hellenistic Greek
occurrences rendered the verb ―I fill up on my part,‖ ―I supplement,‖ arguing that the
preposition ―signifies that the supply comes from an opposite quarter to the deficiency‖;
while Schweizer, 84, and Moule, Idiom Book, 71, suggest it may anticipate the force of the
ujpevr which follows), the simplest interpretation is to regard the prefix as suggesting
correspondence, i.e. the supply corresponds to the deficiency so that the filling up replaces
the lack (cf. Bruce, 215).
     The apostle, through the sufferings which he endures in his own flesh (ejn th/` sarkiv
mou refers to his bodily sufferings, or as Schweizer, TDNT 7, 136, puts it: ―the reference is
to the physical existence of the apostle as this is exposed to affliction‖; cf. Gal 6:17: ejn tw`/
swvmativ mou; 2 Cor 4:10 and 12:7), contributes to the sum total of these eschatological
afflictions. By helping to fill up this predetermined measure Paul brings the end, the
dawning of the future glory, so much closer (Lohse, 71).
uJpe;r tou` swvmato" aujtou`. (On the background and meaning of the ―body of Christ‖ see
on v 18). In verse 24a the apostle had indicated that his sufferings were ―for your sake‖
(uJpe;r uJmw`n, a reference as we have seen to the Colossians and their Lycus valley Christian
neighbors). Here Paul‘s statement is parallel (note the repeated uJpevr) though the
designation is wider. His contributing to the sum total of the messianic afflictions, through
his service and suffering bound up with his calling as an apostle or minister to the Gentiles,
is on behalf of Christ‘s body. By filling up what was lacking of a predetermined measure of
afflictions which the righteous must endure, Paul also reduces the tribulations other
believers, especially these Gentile Christians at Colossae, are to experience. The more of
these sufferings he personally absorbed, as he went about preaching the gospel, the less
would remain for his fellow Christians to endure.
     Though presently exalted in heaven Christ continues to suffer in his members, and not
least in Paul himself. This was driven home to him on the Damascus road when Christ said
to him: ―Why do you persecute me?‖ (Acts 9:4). Up until this moment, Paul had been
actively engaged in making Christ suffer in the person of his followers in Judea. But from
now on he would suffer for Christ‘s sake (Acts 9:16, cf. Acts 13:47, quoting Isaiah 49:6,
where not only is the Servant‘s mission of enlightenment among the nations to be carried
on by Paul [and Barnabas], but also the Servant‘s sufferings are borne by him [Bruce, 216])
or, to use an equivalent expression, for the sake of his body, the church (Col 1:24).
o{ ejstin hJ ejkklhsiva. (See introduction 57–60.)
    25. h|" ejgenovmhn ejgw; diavkono" kata; th;n oijkonomivau tou` qeou` … to;n lovgon tou`
qeou`. Paul was known as a ―minister‖ (diavkono", cf v 23) in the Gentile communities. This
appointment was ―in accordance with the commission of God‖ given to him (kata; th;n
oi;konomivan tou` qeou` th;n doqei`savn moi, a somewhat unusual expression since Paul
normally speaks of the ―grace‖ of God that is given to him: Rom 12:3; 15:15; 1 Cor 3:10;
Gal 2:9; cf. A. Satake, ―Apostolat und Gnade bei Paulus,‖ NTS 15 [1968–69] 96–107).
    oijkonomiva (see Michel, TDNT 5, 151–53) is employed in the Pauline corpus to denote
either (1) Paul‘s administration of his apostolic office (1 Cor 9:17; cf. 4:1 where he
describes himself as one of the stewards [oiJkonovmoi] of God‘s mysteries), or (2) God‘s
administration of the world and salvation (Eph 1:10; 3:9; cf. 3:2). In the earlier references
Paul is the oijkonovmo"; (1 Cor 4:1), having been entrusted with a commission (oijkonomiva";
1 Cor 9:17); he is not able to withdraw from this solemn responsibility, but must fulfill it
obediently. He is a steward of the mysteries of God (1 Cor 4:1) and it is naturally expected
of him that he be found trustworthy (4:2; cf. Luke 16:2). In the later Pauline texts the
emphasis is upon God‘s oijkonomiva. (This need not necessarily imply that the earlier
epistles come from a time when Paul had no notion of a divine plan of salvation; so rightly
Reumann, NTS 13 [1966–67] 155–66.) Most examples of the oijkonomiva terminology in
Paul occur in close proximity to the word ―mystery‖ (musthvrion: the only exception being
1 Cor 9:17) suggesting that the latter was important for understanding the meaning of
oijkonomiva.
    At Colossians 1:25 this nuance of God‘s plan, which is administered by him, is most
likely for the following reasons: (a) oijkonomiva tou` qeou` had this general sense in the
Hellenistic world; (b) the genitive tou` qeou` which is subjective supports this interpretation;
and (c) katav (―according to‖) suggests the notion of a plan in this context (so Reumann,
NTS 13 [1966–67] 163).
At the same time, since the apostle speaks of the oijkonomiva as ―given to me‖ some
commentators have concluded that the phrase must be interpreted exclusively of Paul‘s
office or activity, his assignment rather than God‘s plan which can hardly be said to be
given. Perhaps the way forward is to understand that what is given to Paul is insight into
that plan, a suggestion probably confirmed by verse 26 with its statement about the mystery
being revealed to him and others. If we allow the meaning of ―office‖ to be attached, then it
must be done with Dibelius‘ comment (24) in mind: ―the office stems from the plan.‖ The
double sense seems to be intended as Masson and Reumann have pointed out: Paul says, ―I
am a minister according to the plan of God, the execution of which has been conferred
upon me in that which concerns you‖ (Masson, 111, 112; cf. Reumann, NTS 13 [1966–67]
163, and Moule, 80).
     If this double sense is intended in verse 25 then the passage stands at an important
pivotal point between the earlier and later references. In all three examples in Ephesians
(1:10; 3:2, 9–10) oijkonomiva has to do with God‘s gospel-plan or mystery, together with its
divine administration, while Ephesians 3:2, like Colossians 1:25, also deals with the role
given to Paul in this, namely the making of the mystery known (1:9). (On the meaning of
oijkonomiva see in addition to the works noted above: M. Bouttier, ―Remarques sur la
conscience apostolique de St. Paul,‖ OIKONOMIA. Heilsgeschichte als Thema der
Theologie, ed. F. Christ [Hamburg—Bergstadt: Reich, 1967] 100–108; A. van Roon, The
Authenticity of Ephesians, [NovTSup 39; Leiden, Brill, 1974] 175, 176; and C. C.
Caragounis, The Ephesian MYSTERION. Meaning and Content [ConB, New Testament
Series 8; Lund: Gleerup, 1977] 97, 98).
     The Colossians are bound up with that ministry of Paul, and indeed the very
gospel-plan of God, since it is for their benefit (eij" uJma`"). His ministry as apostle to the
Gentiles vitally concerns them (cf. vv 26–29), and that is why he can style himself a
―minister of the church,‖ even though most of the members of the congregation do not
know him personally. This expression is therefore not as unusual (Schweizer, 86) as some
think (bearing in mind that Paul employs a variety of expressions to describe his ministry:
he is a minister of God, 2 Cor 6:4; a minister of Christ, 2 Cor 11:23; and of the new
covenant, 2 Cor 3:6), and not ―obviously in tension with v. 23, ‖ as F. Hahn contends
(Mission in the New Testament. Tr F. Clarke [London: SCM, 1965] 146 American edition
[SBT 47; Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1965]; see further Merklein, Amt, 337–40).
plhrw`sai to;n lovgon tou` qeou`. For Paul the content of that stewardship, the task to be
performed (cf. Percy, Probleme, 128; Abbott, 233, rightly observes that the aorist infinitive
plhrw`sai is not one of design, but is explanatory, indicating the content of the oikonomiva;
against Meyer, 325) was ―to complete the word of God.‖ A form of this same verb plhrovw
(ie ajntanaplhrovw) has just been used of filling up the deficiencies in the Messiah‘s
afflictions; now it is employed with reference to the Word of God. The verb plhrovw covers
a wide range of meanings: ―to fill, make full, fulfill, complete or finish‖ (BAG, 670–72).
Here it carries the sense of ―doing fully,‖ or ―carrying to completion‖ the divine
commission (see also Acts 14:26 of completing a piece of missionary work, Acts 12:25 of a
mission of assistance, Col 4:17 of a ministry received in the Lord, and Luke 9:31 of the
way of Jesus to the cross; cf. Acts 13:25; Rev 3:2; for further references note Delling, TDNT
6, 286–98).
     The nearest parallel to our text is Romans 15:19, where Paul, in A.D. 57, claims that he
has ―brought to completion‖ the preaching of the gospel (peplhrwkevnai to; eujaggevlion,
lit. ―fulfilled the gospel‖) of Christ in the area between Jerusalem and Illyricum. Some
scholars, such as R. Asting (Die Verkündigung des Wortes im Urchristentum [Stuttgart:
Kohlhammer, 1939] 138) consider this latter passage could mean that Paul has brought the
gospel to its ―fulfillment,‖ to its destiny among the Gentiles; while J. Munck (Paul and the
Salvation of Mankind. Tr F. Clarke [London: SCM, 1959]; American edition [Richmond,
VA: 1959] 48) going a step further, connects Romans 15:19 and Colossians 1:25 with 2
Timothy 4:17 (―that through me the message might be fully proclaimed [plhroforevw], and
that all the Gentiles might hear‖) in connection with the bringing in of the ―fullness
(plhvrwma) of the Gentiles‖ (Rom 11:25). J. H. Schütz (Paul and the Anatomy of Apostolic
Authority [SNTSMS 26; Cambridge: University Press, 1975] 47) commenting on Romans
15:19, makes the interesting suggestion that fulfilling the gospel describes not the finishing
of an assignment, but rather the way in which Paul has executed his task: fully, in word and
deed, with signs and wonders, etc He has set in motion forces by which Christ wins
obedience from the nations. Whether this suggestion is likely in the context of Romans
15:19 is an open question, since it is bound up, in part, with Schütz‘s views about ―gospel‖
and ―authority.‖ However, he has rightly drawn our attention to the notion of an effective
and dynamic preaching of the gospel on the part of the apostle (note in the context of Rom
15:19 the terms ―power,‖ ―signs‖ and ―wonders‖), and his comments give us a clue to the
meaning of the shorter expression in Colossians 1:25. The Word of God is ―fulfilled‖ not
simply when it is preached in the world (so many commentators including Lohse, 73), but
when it is dynamically and effectively proclaimed in the power of the Spirit (cf . 1 Thess
1:5, 6; it is to this end that Paul prays and requests his friends to intercede for him: cf. Eph
6:18–20; Col 4:2–4; 2 Thess 3:1–3) throwghout the world, and accepted by men in faith
(Percy, Probleme, 128; Bruce, 217). Like God‘s Word of old (Isa 55:11) it is dynamic,
achieving the very purpose for which it has been sent forth. Obviously this has particular
reference to Gentiles, as Asting, Munck and others have pointed out, since they are
specifically mentioned in the immediate context (note especially v 27; cf. Eph 3:8).
    Paul‘s comission to make the Word of God fully known has led to the ministry of that
Word, through his associate Epaphras, at Colossae and thus made the Colossians
beneficiaries of his apostolic commission, even though he had not visited them in person.
    26. to; musthvrion … toi`" ajgivoi" aujtou` The message (lovgo" tou qeo`) which Paul
was to ―fulfill‖ is now defined as ―the mystery.‖ By means of a ―revelation pattern‖ that
may well have been used in primitive Christian preaching (so Dahl, Jesus, 32, 33; cf.
Bultmann, Theology 1, 105, 106, and Lührmann, Offenbarungsverständnis, 124–33) a
contrast, using antithetic parallelism, is set forth: the mystery that was once hidden has now
been revealed (cf. Rom 16:25–27; 1 Cor 2:6–10; Eph 3:4–7, 8–11).
The word musthvrion (―mystery‖) was employed in a variety of contexts in the Greek
world and Hellenism: from the many ancient pagan mystery cults whereby ta; musthvria
figured as the cultic rites in which the destinies of a god were portrayed by sacred actions
before the devotees so as to give them a part in the fate of the god and thus attain to
salvation (swthriva); to the mysteries in philosophy, the secret teachings that had as their
aim the vision of the divine; on to the mysteries in secular usage, and Gnosticism which
presupposed and fostered a process of intermingling and reinterpreting the ancient mystery
cults (for details see R. Reitzenstein, Hellenistic Mystery-Religions. Their Basic Ideas and
Significance. Tr J. E. Steely [Pittsburg: Pickwick, 1978]; Bornkamm, TDNT 4, 802–13;
Caragounis, Mysterion, 1–22).
    Contemporary biblical scholarship, however, has rightly rejected the earlier views of
the history of religions which saw the background to the Pauline use of musthvriou in the
ancient pagan mystery cults (on the decline of the history of religions school generally see
M. Simon, ―The religionsgeschichtliche Schule, fifty years later,‖ RelS 11 [1975] 135–44).
Instead, recent research has focused attention on the Old Testament and Judaism (including
Qumran), particularly the wisdom literature and apocalyptic material (so, for example,
Bornkamm, TDNT 4,813–17; Brown, Background, 1–30; Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene,
94–115, among others), and Brown is able to demonstrate that ―the NT writers, particularly
Paul, had in this [Semitic] background all the raw material they needed for the use of
‗mystery‘ without venturing into the pagan religions‖ (32).
     The term musthvrion (―mystery‖) corresponds to the Aramaic zt
     ,  (―secret‖), frequently found in the Book of Daniel (2:18, 19, 27, 28, 29, 30, 47
[twice], which denotes ―an eschatological mystery, a concealed intimation of divinely
ordained future events whose disclosure and interpretation is reserved for God alone‖
(Bornkamm, TDNT 4, 814, 815; cf. Brown, Background, 8). God discloses to his seers ―the
things that must come to pass‖ for it is only he ―who reveals mysteries‖ (oJ ajokaluvptwn
musthvria LXX Dan 2:28, 29). According to the Qumran community God had revealed to
the speaker of the Thanksgiving Hymns (probably the Teacher of Righteousness)
―wonderful mysteries‖ which he is then able to interpret to others (1QH 1:21; 2:13;
4:27–29). These mysteries like those revealed in Daniel, have to do with God‘s purpose to
be realized at the end-time.
     The word musthvrion (―mystery‖) appears in Paul‘s corpus of letters on some
twenty-one occasions and the passages having the closest links with Colossians 1:26, 27 are
1 Corinthians 2:6–10 and Romans 16:25–27 (Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 98–102; cf.
Brown, Background, 52–56). Here mystery does not have to do with some future event that
lies hidden in God‘s plan, but refers to his decisive action in Christ in the here and now (cf .
Schweizer, 88). In fact, the content of the mystery—note it is singular—is Christ himself,
the hope of glory for these Gentile Christians (v 27). This mystery formerly hidden is now
disclosed (1 Cor 2:7; cf. Rom 16:25 where fanerovw is also used). The phrase ajpo; tw`n
aijwvnwn kai; ajpo; tw`n genew`n ought not to be understood with Dibelius-Greeven (24), of
the principalities and powers from whom the mystery was hidden (cf. 1 Cor 2:8), but has its
normal temporal significance meaning ―from (ajpov = ―since‖) ages and generations of the
past‖ (so most commentators).
A dramatic turn of events has occurred (nu`n dev) so that what was previously hidden has
now been disclosed by God (the passive ejfanerw;qh points to the divine activity while the
content of this mystery is spelled out in the following verse). Paul normally describes the
word ―mystery‖ in terms of its disclosure or its being made known: so it is found along
with ―revelation‖ (ajpokavluyi") at Romans 16:25; Ephesians 3:3; and with the verbs
―reveal‖ (ajpokaluvptw) 1 Corinthians 2:10; Ephesians 3:5; ―make known‖ (gnwrivzw)
Romans 16:26; Ephesians 1:9; 3:3, 5; Colossians 1:27; and ―manifest‖ (fanerovw) Romans
16:26; Colossians 1:26.
     The recipients of this disclosure are ―his saints‖ (oiJ a{gioi aujtou`), a phrase that denotes
neither ―angels‖ (Lohmeyer, 82), nor a limited circle of ―charismatics‖ (Käsemann, noted
by Lohse, 75), nor ―the Pentecostal community of Jerusalem‖ (L. Cerfaux, The Church in
the Theology of St. Paul. Tr G. Webb and A. Walker [New York: Herder, 1959] 130–40),
but believers, those who have already been described as the ―saints (a{gioi) and faithful
brothers in Christ‖ (1:2), and are later called ―God‘s chosen ones, holy (a{gioi and beloved‖
(3:12; cf. Bornkamm, TDNT 4, 821; Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 47; Lohse, 75). They are
not some select group of initiates, but are those who have heard and received the word of
God, for it is in the effective preaching and teaching of the gospel that the revelation of the
mystery takes place (cf. 1 Cor 2:1, 7; 4:1; Eph 3:8, 9; 6:19), a point that emerges from an
examination of those contexts where ―mystery‖ stands in apposition to one or other of the
gospel terms: e.g. Colossians 4:3, ―Word‖ (lovgo") and ―mystery‖ (musthvrion); and
Romans 16:25 where the phrases ―according to my gospel (euJaggevlion) and the preaching
(khvpugma) of Jesus Christ‖ are parallel to the words ―according to the revelation of the
mystery‖ (kata; ajpokavluyin musthrivou).
    27. oi|" hjqevlhsen oJ qeo;" gnwrivsai. The usual way of taking this clause is in terms of
God wishing to make known the mystery to the saints. The verb ―make known‖ (gnwrivsai)
resumes the ―revealed‖ (ejfanerwvqh) of v 26, while the recipients of this knowledge are
―the saints,‖ i.e. Christians generally (the antecedent of oi|" is tio`" aJgivoi"). The additional
point being made in v 27 concerns the immense greatness of this mystery, the content of
which is succinctly stated as ―Christ in you, the hope of glory.‖
    Bowers, however (Issues, 110–14), has put forward an interesting alternative. He
suggests that the relative oi|" (―to whom‖) should be regarded as an accusative ou{" (having
been attracted to the dative case of its antecedent toi`" aJgivoi", a common enough
phenomenon in the NT), and this functions as the subject of the infinitive gnwrivsai (―make
known‖). The resultant translation would be: verses 26, 27, ―… to his saints, who God
willed should make known how rich is the splendor of this mystery among the Gentiles,‖
and the effects of this rendering would be: (a) ―make known‖ (gnwrivsai) denotes not an
elaboration of the mystery‘s disclosure just mentioned in v 26b, but a reference to its
proclamation; (b) ―the saints‖ are the agents of this making known rather than the recipients
(the mystery has already been manifested to them according to v 26); and (c) ―among the
Gentiles‖ (ejn toiv" e[unesin) indicates the audience who hear this proclamation by the
saints.
The second alternative overcomes the difficulty of the first, where the Greek seems to
suggest that the recipients of this ―revelation‖ are different from the subjects of it (i.e. the
content of the musthvrion is the risen Christ‘s dwelling in you Gentiles). Bowers‘s view is
that ―the saints‖ are the agents in making known the mystery to Gentiles since it concerns
the latter. D. W. B. Robinson (―Who Were the Saints?‖ RTR 22 [1963] 45–53), had already
made this distinction, believing that ―the saints‖ denoted the first Jewish believers who,
having received the revelation, were to be instrumental in its proclamation to Gentiles.
    On balance it seems that while the second alternative has much in its favor the
grammatical point about an attraction of the relative from a dative to an accusative case is
difficult to prove. We therefore prefer the usual interpretation. Further, while the passage
does not state explicitly (as do 1 Cor 2:10 and Eph 3:3) that Paul received the revelation of
the mystery, and so may seem to give the impression that the mystery was revealed directly
to God‘s saints (v 26), the context clearly implies that in Paul‘s (and his colleagues‘)
preaching the mystery is revealed to believers.
    tiv to; plou`to" th`" sovxh" tou` musthrivou … hJ ejlpi;" dovxh". Several features of this
mystery are now set forth: first, it is magnificent in every way being characterized by
―glory‖ (dovxa). The heaping together of dependent genitive constructions is characteristic
of Colossians (cf. Bujard, Untersuchungen, 156, 157, though it is not necessary to draw
from this feature his conclusions about the authorship of the letter) and here we have a
further example in the expression ―the riches of the glory of this mystery.‖ (Paul is
particularly given to the use of plou`to" with a following genitive: Col 2:2; Rom 2:4; 9:23,
a close parallel to this text; 2 Cor 8:2; Eph 1:7; 2:7; 3:8.)
     plou`to" (―riches‖) is for Paul a term ―to denote the being of Christ, the work of God in
Christ, and the eschatological situation of Christ‘s community‖ (Hauck-Kasch, TDNT 6,
328, 329). In the Corinthian correspondence the wealth of the Christian life was often
expressed by this word plou`to" and its cognates, while elsewhere the apostle spoke of
God‘s or Christ‘s wealth (Rom 2:4; 9:23; 10:12; 11:33; Phil 4:19). The Corinthians
certainly exaggerated the spiritual wealth they possessed (note the irony of 1 Cor 4:8),
failing to recognize the source (2 Cor 8:9), its terms of reference (2 Cor 4:7), that it had
been brought by a mere poverty-stricken apostle (2 Cor 6:10), and that its possession ought
to have resulted in a deep-seated compassion for others (2 Cor 8:2, 7).
     In Colossians and Ephesians the ―wealth of God‖ is a prominent idea pointing to the
lavish bestowal of his blessings in Christ (cf. Col 2:2, note the synonymous term
―treasures‖ used at v 3; Eph 1:7, 18; 3:8, 16). Here at Colossians 1:27 ―riches‖ and ―glory‖
are used together to point to the immense greatness of the mystery (the two terms are often
mentioned together in the OT: cf. LXX Gen 31:16; 1 Kings 3:13; 1 Chron 29:28; etc).
Perhaps by employing the term ―glory‖—dovxa was chosen by the LXX translators to render
the Hebrew ûwbK
     , , the usual word for the splendor or glory of God—the apostle wished to
emphasize that this wonderful mystery partook of the character of God himself.
ejn toi`" e{unesin. The second feature of this mystery is that God graciously purposed to
make it known ―among the Gentiles‖ for it had special reference to them. The prophets of
the OT looked forward to the saving purpose of God in which Gentiles along with Israelites
would be embraced within its scope (note Paul‘s quotations in Rom 15:9–12 to this effect;
see also, for example, Isa 49:6). The manner in which that purpose would cooe to
fruition—by the incorporation of both Jews and Gentiles into the body of Christ— was not
made known. That had remained a mystery until the time of its fulfilment, and Paul, as
apostle to the Gentiles and first steward of this mystery, has the privilege of unfolding its
wonder to his readers. Non-Jews are included along with Jews on an equal footing as
members of Christ‘s body, and it was Paul‘s great joy, as well as his divinely imposed
obligation, to be the agent of making known ―the glorious riches of this mystery among the
Gentiles‖ (for an expansion of this see Eph 3:2–12; Bruce, 218, 219). Here of all places the
wealth of God was lavished in a wonderful way.
     o{ ejstin Cristo;" ejn uJmi`n. Thirdly, the content of this mystery Paul assures his readers
is ―Christ is in you, [Colossians], the hope of glory.‖ These words add to what has
previously been asserted: (a) Christ is at the center of God‘s mystery. The musthvrion
focuses on him as its content. (b) While the mystery has been proclaimed or made known
among the Gentiles (ejn toi`" e[qnesin) it has been believed by the Colossians (cf. 1 Tim
3:16 where the ―mystery‖ refers to Christ not only preached among the Gentiles but also
―believed in the world‖). Christ had been preached to them by Epaphras and they had
received him as Lord (2:6). Christ therefore was ―in them‖ (not simply ―among them‖
which is an appropriate translation of the preposition ejn in the clause gnwrivsai … ejn toi`"
e[qnesin; but here the ejn uJmi`n is more specific than ejn toi`" e[qunesin, having particular
reference to the Colossian readers, and with the verb ejstin points to Christ‘s indwelling in
them as Gentile believers (Bruce, 219, against Lohse, 76).
     As members of his body they had his life within them. They therefore had a sure hope
that they would share in that fullness of glory yet to be displayed on the day of ―the
revealing of the sons of God‖ (Rom 8:19; cf. 5:2; Col 3:4; 1 Thess 2:12; 2 Thess 1:10;
2:14). (The ―mystery‖ of Ephesians is not as different from Colossians as some, including
Mitton, Ephesians, 86–88, and Dibelius-Greeven, 24, 83–85, have suggested; it is not
simply God‘s acceptance of the Gentiles, but also includes their incorporation, along with
Jewish believers, into the community of the Messiah, cf. v 24.)
    28. o{n hJmei`" kataggevllomen nouqetou`nte" … didavskonte". Paul reverts to the
plural ―we‖ (cf. v 9) as he describes his ministry and that of his colleagues, particularly
those coworkers like Epaphras who had brought the gospel to Colossae (vv 7, 8). He
employs three related verbs to describe this activity, and each is in the present tense so
pointing to the habitual practice of his coworkers and himself:
(a) The first verb ―proclaim‖ (kataggevllw) is a weighty one occurring only in Acts and
Paul (cf. Schniewind, TDNT 1, 70–72) becoming almost a technical term for missionary
preaching since it was normally used of the gospel itself or some element in it. So the
gospel (1 Cor 9:14), the mystery of God (1 Cor 2:1), and the Word of God (Acts 13:5;
17:13; cf. 15:36) are ―proclaimed,‖ while sometimes Christ (Phil 1:17, 18), his death (1 Cor
11:26) and resurrection (Acts 4:2), as well as the forgiveness of sins (Acts 13:38), were the
significant elements in the apostolic announcement. At Romans 1:8 Paul indicates that with
the diffusion of the gospel throughout the known world went the report of the Roman
believers‘ faith (on the significance of this see O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings,
207–9). Here at Colossians 1:28 the Christ who is ―proclaimed‖ is the one at the center of
God‘s mystery, i.e. Christ in you (Gentiles). He is the sum and substance of Paul‘s message.
    (b) The public proclamation of Christ as Lord is explained and developed in the
following words about admonition (nouqetou`nte") and instruction (didavskonte"), for it is
through the teaching and warning of every man that the proclamation of Christ is carried
out (this is the relationship of the two participles to the finite verb kataggevlomen, ―we
announce‖; so Lohse, 77, following Schniewind, TNDT 1, 72). Clearly for Paul and his
colleagues evangelistic and missionary outreach was not effected by some superficial
presentation of the saving message about Christ to the world, but rather was prosecuted
through warning and intensive teaching in pastoral situations. (It is unnecessary to see here,
as does Hahn, Mission, 146, a sharp dichotomy between evangelistic and church
proclamation.) The verb nouqetevw (―admonish,‖ ―warn,‖ ―instruct‖), together with its
cognate noun nouqesiva (―admonition‖), had to do with setting the mind of someone in
proper order, correcting him or putting him right (cf. Behm, TDNT 4, 1019–22). It occurs
mostly in the exhortatory contexts of Paul‘s writings within the New Testament having to
do with general admonition given to new Christians (Acts 20:31 of Paul‘s ministry at
Ephesus; cf. 1 Cor 10:11) as well as more specific instruction such as the training of
children within the Christian family (Eph 6:4). Paul uses the term of a ministry of
admonition, criticism and correction, whether by himself, as at Corinth (1 Cor 4:14), or by
church leaders as at Thessalonica (1 Thess 5:12). On occasion, reference is to the
disciplining of those who held false beliefs (Titus 3:10), while both 1 Thessalonians 5:14
and Colossians 3:16 show that the term could be used of members of the Christian
community admonishing one another.
(c) Paul and his colleagues are also involved in intensive teaching (didavskonte"), for it is
through this activity, too, that Christ is proclaimed. In Colossians, as Rengstorf and others
have observed, there is an emphasis on teaching. All Christians are to teach and admonish
one another in psalms, hymns and spiritual songs (3:16 where didavskw and nouqetevw are
again used together; cf. the similar conjunction in Plato, Prot 323D, Dio Chrysostom, .
32.27 and Plutarch Aud 46B; for details see Behm, TDNT 4, 1019, 1020). The congregation
is to remain firm in the faith just as they had been taught to do (kaqw`" ejdidavcqhte, 2:7)
when they were first instructed through the apostolic gospel (1:28). The ongoing teaching
of the apostolic band referred to here has been given ―in all wisdom‖ (ejn pavsh/ sofiva/), a
phrase that may stand over against the Colossian heretics who boasted of their superior
wisdom with its speculative knowledge of the higher worlds. By contrast Paul in the
proclamation of Christ brings all wisdom within the reach of all.
    pavnta a[uqrwpou. The expression ―every man‖ occurs three times in verse 28, being
repeated to emphasize, on the one hand, the universality of the gospel as taught by Paul and
his coworkers, and to contrast the intellectual exclusiveness of the false teachers on the
other (Abbott, 235). ―There is no part of Christian teaching that is to be reserved for a
spiritual elite. All the truth of God is for all the people of God‖ (Bruce, 219). At the same
time Paul does not write the plural ―all (men)‖ (pavnte" [a{nurwpoi]) which would also
have pointed to the universality of the message. The singular is used to show that each
person individually (a[uqrwpo" is generic) was the object of the apostle‘s care. This was
consistent with his regular practice, for elsewhere he describes his apostolic work in terms
of the individual care of souls, e.g., 1 Thessalonians 2:11, 12: ―For you know how, like a
father with his children, we exhorted each one of you (e{na e{kaston uJmw`n) and encouraged
you and charged you to lead a life worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and
glory‖ (RSV). Paul lays strong emphasis in these passages (cf. Acts 20:20) on the personal
character of his work and the fact that at Colossians 1:28 he deliberately returns to the
plural verbs (―we proclaim, warning … and teaching‖) suggests that his colleagues who
ministered with him had followed his example. One could not have been a member of this
apostolic band for long without realizing that Paul, like his Master, cared for the ultimate
well-being of individual men and women.
    i{na parasthvswmen havnta a[nqrwpon tevleion ejn Criotw`/. The goal of this
Christcentered instruction, Paul‘s preaching and teaching, is ―that we may present every
man perfect in Christ.‖ This is similar to the end God had in view in reconciling the
Colossians through the death of his Son, verse 22: to present them (the aorist of the same
verb parivsthmi is used) holy, blameless and irreproachable before him (see 68, 69). God‘s
work of reconciliation in Christ and Paul‘s active ministry have the same end in view,
namely, the perfection of each man in Christ on the final day (Rom 14:10).
    The term tevleio" (―perfect,‖ ―whole‖) appeared in a variety of contexts in the
Hellenistic world (for details see P. J. Du Plessis, TEDEIOS. The Idea of Perfection in the
New Testament [Kampen: Kok, 1959] 36–121) to denote unblemished sacrificial animals
(Homer Il, 1, 66), a person who has reached the limit of his professional abilities and the
cosmos which contains all kinds of living creatures. The word was also employed to
designate the ―perfect‖ man in Greek philosophy (Delling, TDNT 8, 69–72), but whether it
was also a technical term for initiates in the Hellenistic mystery religions is disputed (cf.
Reitzenstein, Mystery-Religions, 150, 432, BAG, 809, and the literature cited there). It is just
possible that the letter to the Colossians opposes those who claimed to have the experience
of being filled with supernatural wisdom and divine power and as such were regarded as
―perfect‖ (tevleioi); cf. Lightfoot, 168, 169, and Lohse, 78.
    tevleio" is attested twenty times in the OT (often rendering, µl•
    ,  or µymt
      ) to denote that which is whole, perfect or intact. It is used of the heart which is
wholly turned to God (1 Kings 8:61; 11:4), and of the man who has bound himself fully to
him (Gen 6:9; cf. Deut 18:13). In the Qumran material the Hebrew term  is
understandably colored by the OT. Those who are perfect () are those who keep God‘s
law wholly and so walk perfectly in his ways (1QS 1:8; 2:2). Members of the community
are also called ―the perfect‖ (1QS 8:20). The contexts in which     (―perfect‖) appears in
the Qumran writings show clearly that the reference is to a total fulfillment of God‘s will
through keeping all the rules of the community (Delling, TDNT 8, 73).
The relationship of perfection to the will of God is found explicitly in Paul at Romans 12:2
as well as by implication in other NT writings (cf. Matt 5:48 in the context of the Sermon on
the Mount; James 1:4, 25; 3:2). The two notions are specifically related at Colossians 4:12
where Paul mentions that his colleague, Epaphras, has prayed that the readers might ―stand
perfect and fully assured in all the will of God‖ (i{na stauh`te tevleioi kai;
peplhroforhmevnoi ejn panti; qelhvmati tou` qeou`).
    When the apostle speaks of presenting every man ―perfect‖ or fully grown in Christ, as
in verse 22 (see 68, 69), he has the Parousia in mind (so Bruce, 220, and Pfitzner, Paul,
109; against Lohse, 78, 79, who takes it as a reference to the present, and Du Plessis,
Perfection, 199, who regards parasthvswmen as an ingressive aorist denoting Paul‘s
―purpose to introduce people to Christ‖). Although he is aware of the real progress in faith
and love (v 4) the readers have already made, as a true pastor Paul will not be satisfied with
anything less than the full Christian maturity of every believer. There are to be no
exceptions, since his aim is that each one (pavnta a[nqrwpon) should reach perfection.
However, this will be fully realized only on the last day, for only then will they, like the
Thessalonian Christians, be completely sanctified (1 Thess 5:23; cf. 3:13).
    29. ei;" o{ kai; kopiw` ajgwnizovmeno". With the prospect of their full perfection in Christ
on the last day in view, Paul expends all his energies in the exercise of his ministry. His
apostolic tasks were not completed with the conversion of men and women. This was only
the beginning and the end would not be reached until the day of Christ when the quality of
his ministry would be tested (Bruce, 221).
    With vivid metaphors Paul indicates how he exerts himself on behalf of the Colossians
and other Gentiles like them (the singular is used again in v 29 to describe his own labors,
but this implies no adverse comment on the ministry of others for he was aware of their
faithful labor on behalf of the various communities: 1 Thess 5:12; 1 Cor 16:16; Rom 16:6).
    kovpo", a word used in secular Greek of ―a beating,‖ ―weariness‖ (as though one had
been beaten) and ―exertion,‖ was the proper word for physical tiredness induced by work,
exertion or heat (see A. von Harnack, ―Kovpo" (Kopia`n) OiJ Kohiw`nte") im
frühchristlichen Sprachgebrauch,‖ ZNW 27 [1928] 1–10, and Hauck, TDNT 3, 827–30). It
denoted severe labor and, together with its cognate kopiavw was used in the New Testament
of: (1) work in general, such as manual labor (2 Cor 6:5; 11:27; Eph 4:28); and (2)
Christian work in and for the community. Under the latter heading kopiavw could describe
Paul‘s apostolic ministry (1 Cor 4:12; 15:10; Gal 4:11; Phil 2:16; Col 1:29; cf. kovpio" 1
Thess 2:9; 3:5; 2 Thess 3:8; 2 Cor 11:23), as well as the toil of other Christians (1 Thess
5:12; 1 Cor 16:16; Rom 16:6, 12; cf. kovpio" 1 Cor 3:8; 15:58; 2 Cor 10:15). These cognate
words were key terms used of Paul‘s pastoral efforts in some of his earliest correspondence
(note the references in 1 and 2 Thessalonians), and in Colossians 1:29 the emphasis is on
the great effort expended by one who labors unceasingly for the congregation‘s welfare.
ajgwnivzomai (―fight,‖ ―struggle,‖ ―engage in a contest,‖ BAG, 15), perhaps even a stronger
term than the preceding, could denote a physical conflict in which weapons were used
(John 18:36; cf. 2 Macc 8:16) and an athletic contest (1 Cor 9:25). Pfitzner, Paul, 109, 110,
claims that at verse 29 this verb (a participle ajgwnizovmeno") is qualified by kopiw` (the
finite verb), and not vice versa, so that both words designate the intense labor and effort of
Paul toward the one goal of presenting every man perfect in Christ. So the translation
―striving‖ (denoting a metaphorical usage) is to be preferred to any reference to struggle or
conflict (cf. 1 Tim 4:10 where a similar expression is found: ei;" tou`to … kopiw`men kai;
ajgwnizovmeqa, ―to this end we toil and strive‖). Pfitzner concludes that, although a
conscious reference to the athletic contest is hardly present, the verb ajgwnivzomai still
carries with it the original coloring of striving after a specific aim or goal (see further on
ajgwvn, 2:1).
    kata; th;n ejnevrgeian aujtou` thn ejnergoumevnhn ejn ejmoi; ejn sunavmei. It has already
been noted (see 24) that God‘s power is a prominent motif in Colossians and Ephesians
(Col 1:11; 2:12; Eph 1:19; 3:7, 16, 20; 6:10) denoting that might which he exercised when
he raised Christ from the dead and by which he now works in and through the lives of his
apostle and people (see on v 11).
    While Paul works, earnestly expending all his energies in the prosecution of his
ministry, he gladly acknowledges that the strength for such unremitting labor comes from
above (cf. Schweizer, 90), an acknowledgment he underscores by heaping up synonyms for
power and might in this context (note the similar feature in 1:11, Eph 1:19; 3:7, 16, 20;
6:10). ejnejrgeia means ―power to work effectively,‖ having appeared in many different
writers from the pre-Socratic period onward. In the NT it always denotes supernatural
power, twice of an evil activity which parodies the work of Christ and lays claim to divine
honors (2 Thess 2:9, 11), but mostly of the exercise of divine power (Eph 1:19; 3:7; Phil
3:21; Col 2:12). The preposition katav (―according to‖) is on occasion found in Paul‘s
petitions and thanksgivings (cf. Phil 4:19; Eph 1:19; 3:16) as well as other contexts where
God‘s power, grace or glory are seen as the source of blessing to the recipient. At the same
time, the supply corresponds to the riches of the divine attribute and is more than adequate
for the needs (cf. Harder, Paulus, 45).
The cognate verb ejnergevw (―be at work,‖ ―work,‖ ―be effective‖; see Bertram, TDNT 2,
652–54, and N. Baumert, Täglich Sterben und Auferstehen. Der Literalsinn von 2 Kor 4,
12–5, 10 [SANT 84; Munich: Kösel, 1973] 267–83) may here be a middle voice (so BAG,
265, among others), but is more probably a passive (K. W. Clark, ―The Meaning of
ejnergevw and katergevw in the New Testament,‖ JBL 54 [1935] 93–101; J. A. Robinson, St.
Paul‘s Epistle to the Ephesians, 2nd edition [London; Macmillan, 1904] American edition
[Grand Rapids: Kregel, 1979] 245–47) indicating that the strength is powerfully (ejn
dunavmei is best understood adverbially) wrought within him (ejn ejmoiv). The present tense
of ejnergoumevnhn (―is being effected‖) parallels kopiw` ajgwnizovmeno" (―I toil, working
hard‖). As Paul strives, so God continues to work mightily within him (cf. 1 Cor 15:10). If
one asks the question: ―Where is God powerfully at work?‖ then in this context the answer
would be: ―Where Paul toils energetically.‖ That is why he is able to say: ―I can do all
things in him who strengthens me‖ (pavnta i;scuvw ejn tw`/ ejndunamou`nriv me, Phil 4:13).
    2:1 qevlw ga;r uJma`" ei;devnai. In the previous paragraph (1:24–29) Paul spoke in general
terms of his apostolic service. His ministry to the Gentile congregations included the
Colossians (vv 24, 25). Now he turns to them in direct personal address (uJma`"), with the
aim of strengthening the bond between the Colossian believers, whom he had not met
previously, and himself. By means of a form used in the letter-writing convention of his
day he wishes to instruct them in an important matter. (cf. T. Y. Mullins, ―Disclosure. A
Literary Form in the New Testament,‖ NovT 7 [1964] 44–50, who has termed this a
―Disclosure form.‖ Other examples are Rom 1:13; 11:25; 1 Cor 10:1; 11:3; 12:1; 2 Cor 1:8;
1 Thess 4:3). The content of that instruction or ―disclosure‖ appears in the following words:
hJlivkon ajgw`na e[cw. The cognate verb ajgwnizovmeno" (―striving‖) has already been used (v
29) of Paul‘s energetic pastoral activities on behalf of those congregations he had founded.
He now states that he is engaged in a similar conflict (ajgwvn) for the sake of those who had
not heard the gospel from his lips, viz. those at Colossae (uJpevruJmw`n), the neighboring city
of Laodicea (tw`n eJn Daodikeiva/) and at other places in the Lycus valley (kai; o{soi oujc
eJovrakan ktl), including, no doubt, those at Hierapolis (cf. 4:13), who apparently were
converted through the ministry of Epaphras.
     But what was the precise nature of this conflict? Lohmeyer (89, 92) argued that the verb
―strive‖ (ajgwnizovmeno"), used at verse 29, and the cognate noun ―conflict‖ (ajgwvn) were
almost technical terms for martyrdom. Accordingly he used these verses to support his
thesis that the letter to the Colossians, like that to the Philippians, was permeated with the
thought of martyrdom. Paul wrote to the Colossians in conscious awareness of his fate as a
martyr. This view, however, has not commended itself to NT scholars. There is no mention
in the entire letter to the Colossians (nor in Philippians for that matter) of martyrdom,
whether in the case of Paul himself or of his readers. Further, both ajgwvn and ajgwnizomai
were not used by Paul as technical terms for martyrdom.
A second view, set forth by Pfitzner (Paul, 109–12, 126–29), is to understand Paul‘s
conflict as his struggle for the gospel or the faith. It involves in the first place untiring toil
and labor, an intense wrestling and struggle for the spread, growth and strengthening of the
faith as the goal of his mission. Further, the thought of a continual struggle against
opposition is not far distant when Paul speaks of his a;gwvn. Suffering is often involved so
that when he refers to his ―struggle on your behalf‖ this is akin to his statement of verse 24
about his ―sufferings for your sake‖ (paqhvmata uJpe;r uJmw`n). Others may participate in
Paul‘s missionary activity. In fact, several passages (Col 4:12, 13; 1 Thess 2:2) reveal an
extension of this struggle for the gospel to include the activity of his coworkers as well as
to members of a whole congregation (Phil 1:27–30; cf. Rom 15:30–32) facing special trial
and of whom it can be said they ―share the same conflict‖ (to;n auJto;n aJgw`na e[conte",
Phil 1:30). According to Pfitzner‘s interpretation, Paul‘s conflict is not to be limited to his
inner struggles for the sake of his readers, whether it be his intercessory prayers on their
behalf (cf. uJpevr uJmw`n), or his inner turmoil of some kind. Rather, this expenditure of his
energies—through his concerns, his prayers (cf. 4:12 regarding Epaphras‘ ministry of
intercession) and by his letters—are to be understood within the wider struggle for the
spread of the gospel and of the faith. His inner conflicts and concerns, then, are part of that
wider ajgwvn itself.
     2. i{na paraklhuw`sin aiJ karsivai aujtw`n. The purpose of this apostolic activity is to
strengthen the readers‘ hearts. The parakalevw word-group had a wealth of meanings in the
Greek world of Paul‘s day, including ―to call someone to oneself,‖ ―to beseech,‖ ―to ask‖
(sometimes in prayer), ―to exhort,‖ and ―to comfort‖ (see Schmitz-Stählin‘s fine article in
TDNT 5,773–99). On occasion in the NT, the verb served to denote missionary proclamation
(2 Cor 5:20; cf. 1 Thess 2:3 and on this note A. Grabner-Haider, Paraklese und
Eschatologie bei Paulus. Mensch und Welt im Anspruch der Zukunft Gottes [NTAbh, NS 4;
Münster: Aschendorff, 1968] 33–44) and as a kind of formula to introduce pastoral
administration (on the use of the parakalevw-formula see C. J. Bjerkelund, Parakalô.
Form, Funktion und Sinn der parakalô-Sätze in den paulinischen Briefe [Bibliotheca
Theologica Norwegica 1; Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1967]). While the translation
―comfort‖ is perfectly legitimate in many contexts (see O‘Brien, Introductory
Thanksgivings, 241–47, for an examination of this ―consolation‖ theme in 2 Cor 1 in the
light of its rich OT background), and is preferred here by Lohse (80), Schmitz-Stählin
(TDNT 5, 797) and others, such a rendering appears to be too weak (cf. Bruce, 223, and
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 108). The verb implies more than ―comfort‖ and ought to be
rendered ―strengthen‖ (cf. v 4, the context of which supports this rendering). In Colossians
there is no mention of, or allusion to, distresses or persecutions that would have elicited
consolation or comfort as the object of the apostle‘s energetic activities. What made Paul
concerned was the readers‘ danger of being carried away by the heretical teaching.
Consequently their hearts needed to be strengthened (note the parallel in 2 Thess 2:16, 17
where parakalevw is used, with reference to the addressees‘ hearts, synonymously with
sthrivzw, ―strengthen‖). ―Heart‖ (kardiva) is employed in its customary OT sense denoting
the inner life of the person, the center of his personality, understood as the source of will,
emotion, thoughts and affections.
    oumbibasuevnte" ejn ajgavph/. A good case has been made for rendering this phrase as
―being instructed in love,‖ so referring to the loving admonition given to the community.
Several commentators (including Dibelius-Greeven, 25, 26, Scott, 36, and Montague,
Growth in Christ, 82) have adopted this line. The verb sumbibavzw does, on occasion, carry
this didactic meaning outside the Bible (for examples in Aristotle, Philo, etc see Delling,
TDNT 7, 763) while all ten LXX instances mean ―instruct,‖ ―make known,‖ ―teach,‖ and
refer exclusively to authoritative direction (cf. Exod 4:12, 15; 18:16; Lev 10:11; Deut 4:9;
Judg 13:8; etc Isa 40:13 is cited by Paul with the meaning ―instruct‖ at 1 Cor 2:16). The
same connotation occurs at Acts 9:22 and 19:33. Further, Scott observed that Paul‘s
preoccupation in Colossians was less the issue of unity than that his readers be enlightened
in their faith over against heretical teachings and practices (the Vulgate seems to have
caught this point with its rendering ―instructi in caritate‖). Also this interpretation suits the
immediate context with its strong emphasis on ―knowledge,‖ ―understanding‖ and
―wisdom.‖ ejn ajgavph/ then refers less to Paul‘s love for the readers—as though they were
―charitably instructed‖—than to love in its full breadth of meaning, as the foundation of the
Christian life (cf. Eph 3:17). (Note the discussion of Montague, Growth in Christ, 82.
    The majority view, however, takes the verb oumbibavzw in the sense of ―unite,‖ ―knit
together,‖ a meaning equally well known from ancient times (cf. Herodotus 1.74.3,
Thucydides 2.29.6, and Plato, Prot 337E; cf. Delling, TDNT 7, 763), and which Paul gives it
in verse 19 and Ephesians 4:16. In this sense (taking ejn instrumentally) love binds them all
together (as some interpret 3:14 where love is called the ―bond of perfection,‖ ouvndesmo"
th`" teleiovthto"), and from the union that results they would attain to full understanding
and knowledge.
The issue is a finely balanced one and while most argue that the translation ―being knit
together‖ is preferable in the light of the later verses in Colossians, our inclination, because
of the immediate context, is in favor of the sense ―taught,‖ ―instructed.‖
     kai; ei;" hlou`to" ktl. Martin, NCB, 75, aptly remarks: ―There is an appeal to
clear-sighted appreciation of theological truth in the second part of the verse.‖ The object
toward which Paul‘s instruction moves (ei;") is a deeper understanding of the divine
mystery, while the stress on the superabundance of such knowledge is signified through the
accumulation of synonyms (cf. Percy, Probleme, 25, 26, and Bujard, Untersuchungen,
147–50).
     As at chapter 1:9, 10 ―insight‖ (suvnesi") and ―knowledge‖ (ejpivgnwsi") are linked to
express the concern of the apostle for the community. Here he goes out of his way to
emphasize the abundant fullness of this suvnesi" (―insight‖ or ―understanding‖ implies, as
at 1:9, the capacity to distinguish the true from the false) by connecting the words ―riches‖
(plou`to"; cf. the comments at 1:27) and ―fullness‖ (plhroyoriva). The latter term can
mean ―full assurance,‖ ―certainty‖ (BAG, 670), and this is its connotation at 1 Thessalonians
1:5 (and also in non-Christian literature, so Delling, TDNT 6, 310). If this is the correct
rendering here, then Paul has introduced the note of assurance or certainty which was
important for the Colossians in the face of false doctrines: either Paul desires that their
judgment be exercised with full certainty (so Abbott, 239, on the grounds that suvnesi" has
an intransitive sense and means ―the faculty of judging‖) or, more likely, he is looking for
the conviction which results from insight (as Moule, 86, Turner, Syntax, 211, and
Montague, Growth in Christ, 83, take it).
     On the other hand, it is equally possible that hlproyoriva means ―fullness‖ (so among
others Lohse, 81, and van Roon, Ephesians, 246), is tautologous with ―riches‖ (hlou`to")
and, together with the additional word ―all‖ (ha`n), underscores in an emphatic manner the
rich fullness of this insight.
     ei;" ejpivgwsin tou` mustprivou tou` ueou` Cristou`. From the abundance of this
understanding Paul turns to speak of the uniqueness of its object. The two phrases
introduced by the preposition ei;" (―to‖) are parallel, though the second emphatically points
out the special object toward which the suvnesi" is directed (Meyer, 342; Abbott, 239): it is
the ―knowledge of God‘s mystery, of Christ.‖ (On the meaning of ejpivgnwsi" see on 1:9
where the parallel expression, ―that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will [th;n
ejpivgnwsintou` uehpvmato" auJtou`],‖ occurs.)
The Greek editions of the NT show that the textual witnesses are divided over the exact
wording of the last phrase (note the bewildering variety of alternatives in the United Bible
Societies edition of The Greek New Testament, edited by K. Aland and others). However,
the reading tou` musthrivou tou` ueou`, Cristou` (RSV ―[knowledge] of God‘s mystery, of
Christ‖) appears to have been original. It asserts that the Christ proclaimed among the
nations and who is the hope of glory for these Gentile readers (cf. 1:27) is the content of the
divine mystery. This text is plainly to be preferred because of the strong external testimony
(being supported by P46 B Hilary). Also, because of the difficulty of this reading it gave rise
to manifold alterations. Later scribes attempted to clarify the sense by their changes and
additions, but each of them can be explained as variants of this original text (for a brief note
see Metzger‘s Textual Commentary, 622, and for a more detailed treatment cf. his volume
The Text of the New Testament. Its Transmission, Corruption and Restoration. 2nd ed.
[New York/London: Oxford University Press, 1968, 236–38]).
     The knowledge of which Paul speaks is personal. Christ himself is God‘s mystery
revealed, the Christ with whom these Colossian readers had become one (Bruce, 224).
There could be no appreciation of divine wisdom apart from this personal knowledge of
him.
     3. ejn w|/ ei;sin pavnte" oiJ uhsauroi; th`" sofiva" kai` gnwvsew" ajpovkrufoi. The
person whom the readers are to know more fully is Christ in whom (ejn w/J/; rather than ―in
it,‖ i.e. the mystery, which is more distant from the relative pronoun and less likely to be the
antecedent on contextual grounds) all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge have been
stored up. ―Wisdom‖ (soyiva) and ―knowledge‖ (gnw`si"), conjoined under the one definite
article (th`"), are virtually regarded as a single entity, as they are elsewhere in Jewish
literature (LXX Ecclus 1:16–18; 2:26; 7:13; 9:10; cf. 1QS 4:3, 22; 1QH 1:18, 19; CD 2:3).
Significantly, the two terms are linked at Romans 11:33 and again conjoined with the
notion of wealth (plou`to"; cf. Col 1:27; 2:2) as Paul praises God for the manner in which
his magnificent sovereign purposes for mankind have been effected with the bestowal of
his unmerited mercy on Jews and Gentiles alike: ―O the depth of the riches and wisdom and
knowledge of God.‖
     The term ―treasure‖ (uhsaurov") was employed in the LXX not only of material wealth
(Josh 6:19, 24; Prov 10:2; etc), but also of spiritual goods, e.g. at Isaiah 33:6 wisdom and
the fear of God are called ―treasures‖ (Hauck, TDNT 3, 137). Paul asserts here, rather
unusually, that all these treasures of wisdom and knowledge (the pavnte" rules out all
exceptions) which exist (pavnte") lie ―hidden‖ (a;povkrufoi indicates the manner of that
existence; Lohmeyer, 94, and Lohse 82). At first sight this statement seems to run counter
to chapter 1:26 where it was indicated that the mystery, previously hidden
(avpokekrummevnon), has now (nu`n sev) in a dramatic turn of events been disclosed by God.
However, the treasures are ―hidden‖ (ajpovkrufoi) not in the sense that they are ―kept
concealed,‖ which is the significance of the perfect passive participle ajpokekrummevnon,
but that they exist (ei;sin) being ―deposited‖ or ―stored up‖ in Christ (cf. Zeilinger, Der
Erstgeborene, 111). To search for other sources of knowledge apart from him is a useless
enterprise.
     According to Lohse, 82, Jewish apocalyptic writings occasionally used the image of a
hidden treasure in order to challenge men and women to pursue right knowledge (cf. 1
Enoch 46:3). Here Paul is encouraging the readers to look to Christ as the only ―place‖
where the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are to be found.
In the hymn of chapter 1:15–20 Christ has been identified with the Wisdom of God,
ascribing to him activities which are predicated of personified Wisdom in the OT and
Judaism. Here, by stating that all of God‘s stores of wisdom and knowledge are hidden
away in him, the apostle is indicating again in an overwhelmingly impressive way that
―Christ has become to Christians all that the Wisdom of God was, according to the Wisdom
Literature, and more still‖ (Moule, 86). Because he holds this exalted position there is good
reason to encourage these Christians of the Lycus valley to turn to him for all God‘s stores
of insight, understanding, wisdom and knowledge.
     It has been argued by some that since the expression ―the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge‖ was not a common one in the Pauline corpus and as the exact phrase does not
occur in the OT, it may well have been borrowed from the vocabulary of the opposition at
Colossae. To be more specific verse 3 is sometimes understood as supporting the Gnostic
character of the opposition. Lightfoot, for example, took this view claiming that Paul, in
employing ajpovkrufoi, again adopts ―a favourite term of the Gnostic teachers, only that he
may refute a favourite doctrine‖ (172). Davies, whose basic thesis is that the ―essential
ideas‖ lying behind Paul‘s proclamation are derived from Judaism, nevertheless states that
the apostle asserts the truth of verse 3 ―with a side-glance at the shibboleths of Gnosticism‖
(Paul, 173), while Hauck argues that it is ―not impossible that the expression chosen in Col
2:3 … is influenced by current Gnostic terminology‖ (TDNT 3, 138; cf. also Bradley, StBibT
2 [1972] 22). However, the supposed parallels to Gnostic literature adduced by Hauck refer
to ―treasures of light‖ rather than to treasures of wisdom and knowledge. There is,
therefore, little direct evidence to support the Gnostic character of the expression used (cf.
Bandstra, Dimensions, 340, 341).
     Others have turned to the OT and Jewish milieu as a more likely source for Paul‘s ideas.
So Martin (NCB, 76) considers that the whole cluster of terms and motifs ―suggest a
conscious indebtedness to the figure of wisdom in Proverbs 2:3ff.‖ (cf. Ecclus 1:25 and Isa
45:3 LXX). Paul is making an appeal to Jewish sources partly because the false teaching at
Colossae on its Jewish side (it was a fusion of Jewish and pagan elements) was insisting
that Jesus Christ was only one mediator and one source of revelation among many.
J. Dupont (Gnosis. La connaissance religieuse dans les épîtres de saint Paul [Paris:
Gabalda, 1949] 16–18) had previously drawn attention to the appearance here of terms used
by Judaism concerning the law (Isa 33:5, 6; cf. Bar 3:15–4:1; Ecclus 24:23 and 2 Apoc Bar
44:14; 54:13). The Jews were confident that in the law they possessed all the treasures of
wisdom (sofiva), and to this the idea of knowledge (gnw`si"), apparently introduced by
Judaizing elements, was attached. According to Dupont (who is followed by Montague,
Growth in Christ, 84, 85), Paul unites the two expressions, substitutes Christ for the law,
and shows that the only ejpivgnwsi" (―knowledge‖) a Christian should seek is to be found in
the mystery of Christ. Clearly, on Dupont‘s reconstruction, the Jewish elements of the false
teaching at Colossae are those which draw the apostle‘s immediate fire here.
     Bandstra (Dimensions, 339–43) has taken the discussion further by arguing that the
close parallels to Paul‘s phraseology of verse 3 in 2 Apoc Bar (esp. 44:14 and 54:13 where
―treasures of wisdom‖ appears) provide additional evidence for the basically Jewish
character of the opposition at Colossae. In the former passage, which is definitely
eschatological with its reference to the ―new world,‖ ―the world to come,‖ ―promised time,‖
etc, Baruch suggests that the possession of the treasures of wisdom and understanding,
designated for those who shall receive the inheritance of the promised time, can be secured
if the elders follow Baruch‘s advice and instruct the Israelites to remain true to the law. But
Paul affirms that the place where the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are to be found is
in Christ and in him alone. Bandstra agrees with Francis‘ claim (Conflict, 163–95) that the
ascetic-mystic literature provides the most helpful background for understanding the
opposition reflected in chapter 2:18, a background that provides the closest parallels to
chapter 2:2, 3. The opposition at Colossae, basically a danger from without, may have come
from ―a conventicle of Jewish mystical ascetics who affirmed that knowledge of God‘s
mysteries came to a person quite apart from any divine mediator‖ (343). Christ was not
really necessary in order to know God‘s eschatological and cosmic mysteries.
    4. Now for the first time Paul expressly points to the danger facing the church
(Schweizer, 95; Martin, NCB, 76).
    tou`to hevgw. These words have been taken: (1) prospectively, referring to what
follows. Accordingly the statement may be regarded as commencing a new paragraph in
which Paul begins to confront the opposition more directly: so Moule, 88, who understands
the i{na in an imperatival sense: ―What I mean is this, don‘t let anyone …‖ Cf Bruce, 224,
and Bjerkelund, , 182, 183, who regards the phrase as equivalent to a
parakalevw-sentence commencing a new section.
     It is preferable, however, to interpret the words (2) retrospectively, referring to what has
immediately preceded, for the following reasons: (a) the so-called parallels to the
prospective use of tou`to levgw, viz. Galatians 3:17 and I Corinthians 1:12, do not contain
the i{na clause; (b) there is no example in the NT of an imperatival i{na following a tou`to
gevgw construction, while John 5:34 encourages the retrospective interpretation: ―I say these
things in order that (tau`ta hevgw i{na) you may be saved‖; (c) the ga[r (―for‖) in chapter
2:5 is much more difficult to justify on the first view (as Moule, 88, rightly concedes) since
Paul‘s words here about being absent in body but present in spirit pick up the thought of
verse 1, so binding verses 1–5 together (note Bandstra‘s careful treatment, Dimensions,
340). The translation is therefore: ―I am saying this in order that no one. …‖
     paralogizhtai ejn hiqanologiva/. ―[That no one] may deceive you with persuasive
language.‖ The verb, meaning ―deceive,‖ ―delude‖ (BAG, 620), is used in the New
Testament only here and at James 1:22 which refers to the selfdeception of those who are
hearers of the word but not doers (the term appears in the LXX and later Greek writers, cf.
BAG, 620 and MM, 487). This deception is effected ―by plausible (but false) arguments‖
(BAG, 657). hiuanologiva means ―persuasive speech,‖ ―art of persuasion‖ (so Plato) and
here it is being used in an unfavorable sense.
Paul has said these things (vs 1–3, especially v 3) to warn the Colossian community not to
give in to the beguiling speech of the false teachers (against Hooker, Christ, 317, who does
not agree that the Colossians are in such imminent danger). Their behavior and manner are
so different from the true messenger of the gospel whose proclamation is ―not in plausible
words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and power‖ (1 Cor 2:4; cf. Lohmeyer,
95).
     5. ei` ga;r kai; th/` sarki; a{peimi. Although (the combination ei; kaiv has a concessive
sense here, see Thrall, Particles, 79) Paul is absent from the Colossian community, he is
aware that the danger facing them is a real one. That is why he is at pains to warn them (the
gavr links with the preceding and gives the basis for speaking such words: see on v 4 and
note Dibelius-Greeven, 26). If he were present at Colossae he would deal with this
menacing situation in person; but his imprisonment prevents him from being with them ―in
the flesh‖ (here the meaning of savrx ―flesh‖ is the same as sw`ma ―body‖ and denotes
bodily existence: so Meyer, 346, Schweizer, TDNT 7, 136, and most others; Moule, Idiom
Book, 46, renders the dative with the adverb ―physically‖).
     ajllaj tw`/ hneuvmati su;n uJmi`n eijmi. Even if he is absent in body yet (cf. 1 Cor 4:15;
9:2; 2 Cor 4:16; Rom 6:5; etc; BDF, para. 448[5]; on the formula type character of the
phrase ―absent in body, present in spirit‖ see G. Karlson, ―Formelhaftes in den
Paulusbriefen,‖ Eranos 54 [1956] 138–41, for further examples from ancient epistolary
literature; cited by Lohse, 83) he is present in spirit. Paul‘s sense of being ―spiritually
present‖ with his fellow-Christians at a distance was extremely strong and vivid. The
clearest and most remarkable example is recorded at 1 Corinthians 5:3–5, where he speaks
of himself as being present in spirit (parw;n se; tw`/ pneuvmati) in the assembly at Corinth,
while living at Ephesus, in order to take part in a disciplinary action. In that case his
presence was assured to a congregation with which he was well acquainted. Here he gives
the same assurance to a church he had not previously visited, while his presence was for ―a
much happier purpose‖ (Bruce, 225).
But how did Paul envisage his spirit as being present with the Colossians or the
Corinthians? Regarding the latter context (1 Cor 5:3–5) the expression ―in spirit‖ (tw`/
hneuvmati) suggests something more than that they were present in his thoughts and
prayers, however true this may have been. Paul states that he is present with them, not that
they are with him. Certainly at 1 Corinthians 5:4 it is a real presence, not simply that he
agrees with their verdict, for he writes, ―When you and my spirit are assembled.‖ He clearly
conceived of his spirit‘s presence in a place far removed from where his body stood. Otto
may be right when he states: ―In all reality and without hesitation he believed that he was
capable of operating spiritually at a distance‖ (cited by J. D. G. Dunn, Jesus and the Spirit.
A Study of the Religious and Charismatic Experience of Jesus and the First Christians as
Reflected in the New Testament [Philadelphia: Westminster, 1975] 73), but this does not tell
us much, while Dunn‘s hint that it was due to the power of a charismatic personality makes
the reference too narrow. Best‘s suggestion (Body, 59) is nearer the mark. Commenting on
the Corinthian passage, he affirms that Paul is present with the Corinthians since both live
with Christ. Because Best takes the idea of Christ as an inclusive or corporate personality
seriously, he envisages the presence of the whole personality whenever a ―part‖ of it is
acting. Paul is truly at Corinth and Colossae not because his pneu`ma is to be ―regarded as
the gift of the Spirit of God which has been given to him, which denotes his authority, and
which also exerts an influence beyond his physical presence‖ (so Schweizer, TDNT 6, 436),
but since the Spirit of God has united both him and the Colossians to Christ. Because both
live with Christ, he is present in spirit with them.
     xaivrwn kai; blevpwn ktl. These words indicate by way of summary how the Colossian
community was faring, and the description is a positive one. The two participles caivrwn
and blevpwn are best taken together and rendered ―rejoicing to see‖ (with Bengel 2, 459,
Robertson, Grammar, 426, 427, BDF, para. 471[5], etc, against Meyer, 347, who considers
that xaivrwn refers to Paul‘s joy at the fact that he is with them spiritually, while blejpwn
adds to the thought by indicating what is perceived). Obviously because of Paul‘s physical
absence blevpw is used figuratively meaning ―perceive,‖ ―note‖ (cf. Rom 7:23; 2 Cor 7:8;
Heb 2:9; 10:25).
     Two interesting terms are employed in this positive description of the church‘s
condition: tavzi" (―order‖) and sterevwma (―firmness,‖ ―steadfastness‖), both of which
could appear in military contexts, the former denoting the positions which soldiers occupy
(cf. Xenophon, Anabasis 1.2.18; the Qumran community called itself a camp and its order
was to be maintained at all costs: 1QS 10:25; cf 4:4; 1QM 3:1, where the Hebrew equivalent
of tavxi" is used; cf. Bertram, TDNT 7, 614), the latter describing a bulwark or fortification
(1 Macc 9:14; cf. Bertram, TDNT 7, 609–14). So some have pressed the military metaphor
in this context. For Lohmeyer, ―The apostle is ‗with them‘ as a field commander standing
before his troops and arranging the ranks for battle once more‖ (95), while Martin (NC B, 76,
77) interprets the words of Paul to mean that he viewed with approval their steadfast intent
to close ranks and stand firm, without yielding to erroneous propaganda from an intruding
enemy (cf. Moule, 89).
     An examination of the different occurrences of these two terms in a variety of contexts
(Classical Greek writers, the LXX, papyri and patristic material) shows that from earliest
times tavxi" and sterevwma did not necessarily have a military nuance but only assume one
from their respective contexts (Abbott, 243; cf. Dibelius-Greeven, 26; the lexicons of BAG,
MM, Hatch and Redpath, and Lampe draw attention to a variety of instances where there is
no military meaning). Further, the context here does not suggest the positioning of troops
for battle. Both concepts are employed in a more general sense so that tavxi" denotes the
well-ordered Christian behavior of the community (cf. 1 Cor 14:40) which previously had
not been disturbed by sectarian divisions nor forsaken by its readers, while sterevwma
describes the ―firmness‖ or solidarity of their faith in Christ (th`" eiv" Cristo;n pivstew"
uJmw`n; cf. Acts 16:5; 1 Peter 5:9). This faith, which was dynamic in character (cf . Bultmann,
TDNT 6, 212, who correctly points out that pivsti" can frequently denote the living and
dynamic aspect of faith rather than the mere fact of it, for example, 2 Cor 10:15; Phil 1:25)
was firmly founded because it was directed to Christ alone (ei;" Cristovn), and as long as
they held fast to him no temptation would overcome them. Well might Paul be joyful
(caivrwn) as he was given this description by Epaphras of the believing community at
Colossae.
The praise given to the congregation suggests that, although it was troubled by false
teachers (who were hardly an external threat only, as W. Foerster, ―Die Irrlehrer des
Kolosserbriefes,‖ Studia Biblica et Semitica. Prof. Th. C. Vriezen dedicata Wageningen:
Veenman and Zonen, 1966] 72, 73, and Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief 43, indicate), the church
was still basically sound in the faith, preserving the apostolic message and persisting in it.
The heresy had not achieved anything like real success (cf. 2:4, 8, 20) though it may well
have encroached on a section of the Christians, threatening to disrupt others. On the basis
of their adherence to the apostolic gospel, with its center being Christ Jesus as Lord, the
apostle is now able to attack the heresy which has been enticingly presented (v 4).

Explanation
     Having stated that he is a servant of the gospel (v 23) Paul describes his suffering and
its relation to his God-given task (v 24, 25). He rejoices in his sufferings on behalf of the
Colossians for they are part and parcel of the afflictions of Christ, the messianic woes that
usher in the end-time. The more sufferings he personally absorbed—as he was engaged in
his apostolic task of preaching the gospel—the less would remain for these fellow
Christians to endure. He was currently filling up what was left over of the full quota of
these messianic afflictions.
     Though now exalted in heaven, Christ continues to suffer in his members, not least in
Paul himself. Prior to his conversion, Paul had been actively engaged in making Christ
suffer in the person of his followers in Judea (cf. Christ‘s words to him: ―Saul, Saul, why do
you persecute me?‖ [Acts 9:4]). But from now on he would suffer for Christ‘s sake (Acts
9:16) or for the sake of his body, the church.
     Paul‘s ministry, a commission given to him in accordance with the gospelplan of God,
was to proclaim the Word of God dynamically and effectively throughout the world. The
message itself was none other than God‘s mystery (previously hidden but now revealed), a
message that was truly glorious, for here the wealth of God was lavished in a wonderful
way; it was a message God had graciously purposed to make known among the Gentiles
since it had special reference to them; and, it focused on Christ as the one who indwelt the
Colossians.
     Paul worked energetically proclaiming Christ as Lord. This he did by systematic and
intensive teaching and admonition. His pastoral and apostolic tasks were not finished with
the conversion of men and women. This was only the beginning and the end would not be
reached until the day of Christ when the quality of his ministry would be tested. So he
strove energetically for the cause of the gospel as God continued to work mightily through
him, and he made it his aim to present every man perfect in Christ on the final day.
    What was true of Paul‘s struggle for the sake of the gospel generally had reference to
the Colossians and other Lycus Valley Christians as well. He desired that their lives might
be strengthened and this would occur as they came to a deeper understanding of Christ,
God‘s mystery revealed, the one in whom all the treasures of wisdom were available.
Now, for the first time (2:4), Paul expressly mentions the danger facing the church. He
warns the Colossian community not to give in to the persuasive but deceptive speech of the
false teachers. Though he is physically absent from them he is present in spirit and he wants
to encourage them with the good reports he has heard; he is delighted to learn of their
orderly Christian life and the stability of their faith in Christ.




The Antidote to Error: Christ in All His
Fullness (2:6–15)
Bibliography
Bacchiocchi, S. From Sabbath to Sunday. A Historical Investigation of the Rise of Sunday
Observance in Early Christianity. Rome: Pontifical Gregorian University, 1977, 339–62. Bandstra,
A. J. The Law and the Elements of the World. An Exegetical Study in Aspects of Paul‘s Teaching.
Kampen: Kok, 1964. American edition, Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, n.d. Beasley-Murray, G. R.
Baptism in the New Testament. London: Macmillan, 1962. ———. ―The Second Chapter of
Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 469–79. Benoit, P. ―Corps, téte et plérôme dans les épîtres de la
captivité.‖ RB 63 (1956) 544. Blanchette, O. A. ―Does the of Cheirographon of Col 2:14 Represent
Christ Himself?‖ CBQ 23 (1961) 306–12. Blinzler, J. ―Lexikalisches zu dem Terminus ta;
stoicei`a tou` kovsmou bei Paulus.‖ Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus Internationalis Catholicus. 2
vols. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1963.2.429–43. Bornkamm, G. Conflict, 123–45. ———.
―Baptism and New Life in Paul. Romans 6.‖ Early Christian Experience. Tr P. L. Hammer.
London: SCM, 1969, 71–86. American edition, New York: Harper and Row, 1969. Bruce, F. F.
Tradition Old and New. Exeter: Paternoster, 1970. American edition, Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 1970. Carl, W. ―Two Notes on Colossians.‖ JTS 24 (1973) 492–500. Cullmann, O.
―The Tradition.‖ The Early Church, ed. A. J. B. Higgins. London: SCM, 1956, 59–99. Ernst, J.
Pleroma. Halter, H. Taufe und Ethos. Paulinische Kriterien für das Proprium christliche Moral.
Freiburg: Herder, 1977. Hanson, A. T. Studies in Paul‘s Technique and Theology. London: SPCK,
1974. Lohse, E. ―Ein hymnisches Bekenntnis in Kolosser 2, 13c–15.‖ Mélanges Bibliques en
hommage au R. P. Béda Rigaux, ed. A. Descamps and A. de Halleux. Gembloux: Duculot, 1970,
427–35. Reprinted in Einheit, 276–84. Martin, R. P. ―Reconciliation and Forgiveness in
Colossians.‖ Reconciliation and Hope. New Testament Essays on Atonement and Eschatology
presented to L. L. Morris on his 60th Birthday, ed. R. Banks. Exeter: Paternoster, 1974, 104–124.
American edition, Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans. 1974. Moule, C. F. D. Origin. Schille, G.
Frühchristliche Hymnen. 2nd. ed. Berlin: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, 1965. Schnackenburg, R.
Baptism in the Thought of St. Paul. A Study in Pauline Theology. Tr G. R. Beasley-Murray. New
York: Herder, 1964. Schweizer, E. ―Christianity of the Circumcised and Judaism of the
Uncircumcised. The Background of Matthew and Colossians.‖ Jews, Greeks and Christians.
Religious Cultures in Late Antiquity. Essays in Honor of William David Davies, ed. R.
Hamerton-Kelly and R. Scroggs. Leiden: Brill, 1976, 245–60. ———. ―Die ‗Elemente der Welt.‘
Gal 4, 3.9; Kol 2, 8.20.‖ Verborum Veritas. Festschrift für Gastav Stählin zum 70. Geburtstag, ed.
O. Bocher and K. Haacker. Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1970, 245–59. Reprinted in Beiträge, 147–63.
Seeberg, A. Der Katechismus der Urchristenheit. Leipzig: A. Deichertschen, 1903. Reprinted as
TBü 26. Munich: Kaiser, 1966. Tannehill, R. C. Dying. Wegenast, K. Das Verständnis der
Tradition bei Paulus und in den Deuteropaulinen. WMANT 8. Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener,
1962. Weiss, H. CBQ 34 (1972) 294–314. Wengst, K. Formeln. Williamson Jr., L. ―Led in
Triumph. Paul‘s Use of .‖ Int 22 (1968) 317–32.

Translation
6
  So then, just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to live in him, 7rooted and
built up in him, established in the faith as you were taught, and overflowing with
thanksgiving.a
         8
           See to it that no one takes you captive by means of a hollow, deceptive philosophy,
    which depends on mere human tradition, derived from the elemental powers of the
    world and not from Christ. 9For in him the whole fullness of deity dwells in bodily form,
    10
       and you have been filled in him who is the head over every power and authority. 11In
    him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting
    off the body of flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. 12You were buried with him in
    baptism; in him you were also raised with him through faith in the power of God who
    raised him from the dead. 13When you were dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision
    of your sinful nature, God made you alive with Christ. He forgave us all our trespasses,
    14
       having canceled the IOU which, because of the regulations, was against us and stood
    opposed to us; he took it away, nailing it to the cross. 15Having stripped the
    principalities and powers of their authority and dignity God exposed their utter
    helplessness for all to see, leading them in his triumphal procession in Christ.

Notes
a
  Although the reading ejn aujth`/ ejn eujcaristia/ has strong manuscript support [B Dc H K
Byz Lect, some of the versions, etc] it is probably a copyist‘s assimilation to 4:2, while the
alternate reading ejn aujtw`/ is probably a subsequent modification because of the preceding
phrase ejn aujtw`/ejn eujcarisriva appears to have been the original reading; cf. Metzger,
Textual Commentary, 622.

Form/Structure/Setting
    As he begins his interaction with the ―philosophy‖ (filosofiva) of the false teachers,
the apostle admonishes the addressees to continue in the teaching they had received and to
remain immovable in their faith (2:6, 7). These two verses, which summarize much of what
has preceded (Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 49) and which lay the foundation for the attack
on the Colossian heresy that follows, contain an introductory subordinate clause (v 6, wJ"
ou\n parelavbete to;n Cristo;n ÆIhsou`n to;n kuvrion, ―so then, just as you received Christ
Jesus as Lord‖) and a longer principal clause (vv 6b, 7) consisting of an imperative, three
participial expressions joined by kaiv (―and‖), a parenthesis and a concluding participial
expression (Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 50; cf. Bujard, Untersuchungen, 74–76, 80–86,
regarding the literary style of vv 6–15):


6b
ejn aujtw`/ peritatei`te

7a
ejrrizwuevnoi

b
kai; ejpoikodomouvmenoi ejn aujtw`/

c
kai bebeaiouvmenoi th/` pivstei

d
—kaqw;" ejdidavcqhte—

e
perisseuvonte" ej eujcapistia/


(―live in him
rooted
and built up in him
and established in the faith
—as you were taught—
overflowing with thanksgiving.‖)

    At verse 8 the community is confronted with the first of several warnings that will
demand of it clear, unequivocal decisions. The imperative blevpete (―beware‖) is followed
by what is, in effect, a sentence of prohibition and by using two sets of prepositional
phrases in synonymous parallelism the means by which the false teachers intend to carry
out their plan to ensnare the congregation is mentioned:


8b
dia; tp`" filosofiva"

c
kai; kenp`" ajpavth"

d
kata; th;n paravdosin to`n ajnqrwvpwn

e
kata; ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou
(―through philosophy
and empty deceit
according to the tradition of men
according to the elemental powers of the world.‖)

    The conclusion of the verse is brief and pungent, presenting a sharp antithesis to what
has immediately preceded: kai; ouj kata; Cristovn (―and not according to Christ‖).
    Verses 9 and 10, in which language from the hymn is taken up (ejn aujtw`/ katoikei` pa`n
to; plhvrwma ktl.) spell out why (kaiv) the ―philosophy‖ of the false teachers is ―not
according to Christ.‖ Two reasons are given in separate clauses, linked by kaiv/ (―and‖),
where there is a play on ejn aujtw`/ (―in him‖) and plhvrwma (―fullness‖):


o{ti ejn aujtw`/ katoikei` pa`n to; plhvrwma th`" qeovthto" swmatikw`".

kai; ejste; ejn aujtw`/ peplhrwmevnoi,

o{" ejstin hJ kefalh; pavsh" ajrch`" kai` ejxousiva".

(―For in him the whole fullness of deity lives in bodily form, and you have been filled in
him,

who is the head over every power and authority.‖)

    Paul continues (vv 11, 12) the theme of incorporation in Christ. Having mentioned that
the readers have been ―filled in him,‖ he elaborates on this by asserting that they have
participated in Christ‘s death, burial and resurrection:


ejn w|/ kai; perietmhvqhte peritomh/` ajceiropoihvtw/ …

suntafevnte" aujtw`/ …

ejn w|/ kai; sunhgevrqhte …

(―In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands,

you were buried with him …

in him you were also raised …‖

Verse 13 marks a change in the sectionú There is a switch in the subject from ―you‖ to
―he‖; God has made you who were dead to be alive with Christ. Again a sharp contrast is
drawn between the readers‘ pre-Christian past (kai; uJma`" nekrou;" o{nta" … th`" sarko;"
uJmw`n, ―also you who were dead …‖) and their present standing in Christ, brought about by
God‘s action (sunezwopoivhsen uJma`" su;n auJtw`/, ―he made you aliv
     In the latter half of the verse there is a further change to ―us‖ and ―our‖ from ―you‖ (i.e.
from the second person to the first), and several scholars have concluded that verses
13c–15, in which traditional Christian formulations appear, are a fragment of a confession
constructed in hymnic phrases which the author appropriated, since it clearly expressed for
him the essential connection between the forgiveness of sins and victory over the
principalities and powers (so Lohse, 106, 107; also Einheit, 276–84; cf. Martin,
Reconciliation, 1974, 116–24).
     Schille (Hymnen, 31–37; cf. Lohmeyer, 100–102) had previously argued that a
redeemer or baptismal hymn underlay verses 9–15 but this view has been rejected even by
those who detect hymnic elements in verses 13–15. Verses 9, 10b are not the beginning of a
hymn (the o{ti is causal, not recitative) but rather an explanatory resumption of chapter
1:15–20 (note the critiques of Deichgräber, Gotteshymnus, 167–69, and Lohse, Einheit,
277–79). Wengst too (Formeln, 186–94) assumed that verses 13–15 were based on a
continuous traditional piece. However, to demonstrate that the hymn consisted of three
verses each containing three lines (vv 13, 14, 15) he is obliged to change the text (the ―you‖
was originally ―we‖ and the expression ―the uncircumcision of your flesh‖ is dropped out),
but these adjustments are not convincing.
     Lohse‘s structuring of the passage has the merit of drawing to our attention the
relationship of the participles to the finite verbs in verses 14 and 15 (ejxaleiya" … h|rken
… proslwvsa", ―having canceled … he took away … nailing‖; and a;pekdusavmeno" …
ejdeigmavtisen … qpiambeuvsa", ―having disarmed … he made a spectacle … leading in
his triumphal procession‖), but this does not commit us to a hymnic confession underlying
verses 13c–15. The linguistic argument is two-edged. For if the passage contains words that
occur either rarely or nowhere else in the NT (cf. Lohse, 106) then it is unusual to speak of
the author adopting ―traditional formulations.‖ The problem of the source of these
expressions remains, and it might as well have been Paul as some unknown disciple—at
least he does use the verb upiambeuvw (2 Cor 2:14; he is the only NT writer to have done
so).
     Nevertheless verses 13c–15 are difficult to structure; in verse 13 a contrast is drawn:
kai; uJma`" nekrou;" o{nta" … sunezwohoivhsen, ―and you who were dead … he made
alive.‖ The participle carisavmeno" which introduces the statement about the forgiveness
of sins is probably causal (though some have suggested it is explanatory, see the exegesis
below), while each of the two finite verbs in verses 14 and 15 is preceded and followed by
a participle (see above).
It remains to draw attention to the ―in Christ (him)‖ motif which runs like a scarlet thread
through the whole passage (the significance of which is assessed below): ejn auJtw`/ (―in
him,‖ vv 6, 7, 9, 10, 15); ejn w|/ (―in whom,‖ vv 11, 12; cf. auJtw`/, ―him,‖ v 12, and auJtw`/,
―with him,‖ v 13). That the paragraph should begin with this important phrase ejn su;n auJtw`/
and end on a similar note suggests we have an example of inclusio, i.e. the text closes on
the same note as its beginning.

Comment (2:6, 7)
   In the paragraph commencing with verse 6 we come to the heart of the letter (cf.
Dibelius-Greeven, 26). Here Paul gives a careful exposition of his teaching (sometimes
drawing on traditional materials) for purposes of positive instruction and by way of a
corrective to the false teaching. Verses 6 and 7 occupy a pivotal position: (a) they set forth
the positive instruction that serves as a basis for the attack on the Colossian heresy, and this
is because (b) they summarize much of what has preceded: so the Christological statement,
―Christ Jesus the Lord,‖ draws attention to the one who is at the center of the mystery
(1:27) and the subject of the magnificent hymn (1:15–20), who is Lord over all; the notion
of incorporation (―in him‖) is reiterated as is the thought of being grounded in the faith (v
7; cf. 1:23). The significant motif of teaching (to which may be joined the kindred theme of
tradition), verse 7, focuses our attention again on the initial instruction in the gospel by
Epaphras (1:6, 7), while the ideas of ―walking‖ (v 6) and ―abounding in thanksgiving‖ (v 7)
tie in with Paul‘s intercessory prayer for the readers (1:10, 12), namely that they may walk
(perihatevw) worthily of the Lord and give joyful thanksgiving to the Father. In the space
of a few brief words the apostle encapsulates many of the important ideas already spelled
out in the letter, drives them home to the hearts of his readers by means of an
―indicative-imperative‖ formulation and prepares to confront them with sharp alternatives
(v 8) that will demand of them clear unequivocal decisions.
     6. wJ" ou|n parelavbete to;n Crioto;n ÆIhsou`n to;n kuvrion. With the connective
particle ―then‖ (ou|n) a transition is made to a new section. The writer uses an
―indicative-imperative‖ form (cf. 2:20; 3:1–4; Rom 15:7; Gal 5:25; Phil 2:5) to introduce
the subject of tradition, for when Paul says that his readers have ―received‖ (parelavbete)
Christ Jesus as their Lord he is not simply reflecting on their personal commitment to
Christ (though this is no doubt included), but he uses the semitechnical term specifically
employed to denote the receiving of something delivered by tradition.
Early Christianity took over from rabbinic Judaism the idea of transmitting and
safeguarding a tradition (the verbs ―receive,‖ ―accept,‖ paralambavnw, and ―transmit,‖
paradidwmi, correspond to the rabbinic terms  and ). The classic Jewish
exposition occurs in the ―Sayings of the Fathers‖ which scribal legend had traced back to
Moses: ―Moses received the Torah from Sinai and delivered it to Joshua, and Joshua to the
elders, and the elders to the prophets, and the prophets delivered it to the men of the Great
Synagogue‖ ( 1:1). Primitive Christian tradition, however, was not connected with
the authority of famous teachers, but was concerned ultimately with its source, ―from the
Lord‖ (1 Cor 11:23). Paul regularly reminded his congregations in the Gentile mission of
the traditions he handed over to them, the content of which appear to have comprised three
main elements: (a) a summary of the gospel, particularly the death and resurrection of
Christ, expressed as a confession of faith (1 Cor 15:1–5; 1 Thess 2:13); (b) various deeds
and words of Christ (1 Cor 11:23–26; 7:10, 11; 9:14); and (c) ethical and procedural rules
(1 Cor 11:2; 1 Thess 4:1; 2 Thess 3:6). (On the subject of tradition see Cullman, Church,
59–99; Bruce, Tradition, 29–38; J. I. H. McDonald, KERYGMA and DIDACHE. The
articulation and structure of the earliest Christian message [SNTSMS 37; Cambridge:
University Press, 1980] 101–125; cf. Wegenast, Verständnis, 121–30, who, however,
considers paralamba;nw at v 6 refers not to the acceptance of the apostolic tradition but to
the baptized person‘s coming under the lordship of Christ [128]).
     The Colossians have received Christ himself as their tradition. The expression to;n
Cristo;n ÆIhsou`n to;n kuvrion is not an allusion to sayings of Jesus communicated as
directions for right conduct (though cf. 1 Cor 7:10, 11; 9:14), as Cullmann, in Church, 64,
suggested but is an early credal confession ―Jesus Christ is Lord‖ (cf. Rom 10:9; 1 Cor
12:3; Phil 2:11). No doubt it summarizes the tradition delivered to the Colossians in
Epaphras‘ initial evangelism which focused on the person of Christ Jesus (note 2 Cor 4:5).
Whether ―Christ‖ (to;n Cristo;n) was here understood as a title or not is a disputed point
(Moule, 89, 90, claims it is difficult not to give it the force of a title; so also Turner, Syntax,
167; against Lohse, 93, who regards it as joined to ―Jesus‖ to form a double name).
Certainly the definite article ―the‖ (to;n) before ―Lord‖ (kuvrion) makes this term emphatic
and probably as Foerster, TDNT 3, 1090, has suggested, gathers up all that Paul has
previously said about Christ in Colossians. The one whom the Colossians received as their
tradition is the center of God‘s mystery (1:27, 2:2), and the Lord in both creation and
reconciliation (1:15–20). He is Lord absolutely (1 Cor 8:5, 6), not just one among many.
     ejn aujtw`/ peripatei`te. With this summons, ―continue to live in him,‖ the apostle
moves from the indicative to the imperative. For Paul there is no hiatus between believing
and behaving. As Lohse (93) puts it: ―Christology and ethics are intimately conjoined.‖ The
metaphor of walking (cf. the comments on 1:10) is frequently employed by Paul, deriving
ultimately from an OT and Jewish background, to characterize the Christian‘s life and
behavior (see Gal 5:16; Rom 14:15; 2 Cor 4:2, etc). He has already interceded for his
readers (1:10) that they might live (peripath`sai) in a manner worthy of the one whom
they confess as Lord, by pleasing him in all things. Having prayed to that end he now
exhorts them along similar lines. His pastoral activity of praying did not obviate the
necessity for exhortation. Indeed, the latter may well have been one of the means used by
God to bring about the answers to Paul‘s petitions.
Since the Colossians had begun the Christian life by submitting to Christ Jesus as Lord they
were now (the ―as,‖ wJ", of the first clause may be balanced with the corresponding ―so‖ but
the meaning is clear enough without the ou{tw" being supplied; cf. Seeberg, Katechismus,
169; BAG, 897, under section II) to go on living (the imperative peripatei`te is a present
tense) under that lordship as those incorporated into him (for a recent study on the ―in
Christ‖ and ―in the Lord‖ phrases with special reference to the notion of incorporation see
Moule, Origin, 47–96, and the literature cited there). They are to understand more and more
about the consequences of his supremacy (Masson, 120). This would mean a rejection of
rival loyalties, especially of alien principles (Martin, Lord, 73).
     7. At chapter 1:10, in Paul‘s intercessory prayer for the Colossians, four participles
(―bearing fruit,‖ ―increasing,‖ v 10; ―being strengthened,‖ v 11; and ―giving thanks,‖ v 12)
directly followed the verb ―to walk‖ (peripath`sai) and defined more precisely what was
involved in walking ―worthily of the Lord.‖ Here also a series of four participles, ―rooted‖
(ejrrizwmevnoi), ―built up‖ (ejpoikodomouvmenoi), ―established‖ (bebaiouvmenoi) and
―abounding‖ in thanksgiving (perisseuvonte" ejn eujcaristia/) indicate what is meant by
walking (the same verb peripatei`te is used) in him. Perhaps it is not coincidental that in
both passages the imagery of a tree is employed (at 1:10 the notion of bearing the fruit of
good works is in view, while here the idea of being firmly rooted is to the fore), as well as
the theme of thanksgiving which appears as the last of the series in each section. In his
pivotal passage the apostle instructs the readers as to what is involved in true Christian
behavior before proceeding to deal with the false teaching.
     ejrrizwmejnoi kaiv ejpoikodomouvmenoi ejn aujtw`/ kai; bebaiouvmenoi th`/ pivstei. The
first three participles belong together though as Lightfoot (174) noted there is a rapid
transition of metaphor. Having spoken of a path on which one is to walk (v 6) Paul moves
to the language of horticulture (―rooted‖), then to an architectural metaphor (―built up‖) and
finally on to an image of the law-court (―established,‖ ―confirmed‖). Each of these
participles is in the passive voice probably pointing to the divine activity. Whatever
responsibilities to Christ the readers had, and these were many, they were not to lose sight
of the fact that God had been at work in their midst. It was he who had rooted them in
Christ and was presently building them up in him, thereby consolidating them in the faith.
    (1) ejrrizwmejnoi. The verb rJizovw (―cause to take root‖; in the LXX ―take root‖) appears
in the NT only here and at Ephesians 3:17, though in both cases the building metaphor is
linked. The perfect tense, in contrast to the three following participles which are all in the
present, is significant and denotes a settled state (so most commentators): the readers have
been firmly rooted in Christ (the ejn aujtw`/ qualifies ejrrizwmejnoi as well as
ejpoikodomouvmenoi) and they are to conduct their lives asccording to this beginning.
    (2) ejpoikodomouvmenoi. Repeatedly in ancient literature the images of being rooted and
built up are linked with reference to buildings (for references see Maurer, TDNT 6, 990).
Here, as at 1 Corinthians 3:6–11, the metaphors are joined so as to describe the solid
foundation upon which believers‘ lives are to be based. The original figurative meaning of
both verbs is not to be pressed since the expression is determined by the conception of the
thing signified, i.e. the being in Christ and walking in him (so rightly Meyer, 351; the first
metaphor lost much of its original figurative meaning by its conjunction with the second
anyway, while the image of the building only goes so far: Paul has written neither ejpj
aujtovn, 1 Cor 3:12, nor ejpj aujtw`/, Eph 2:20, which would have been in harmony with this
latter participle, but ejn aujtw`/, ―in him‖).
(3) The words kai; bebaiouvmenoi (―and being established‖) continue the notion of the
readers‘ consolidation in the faith (the kaiv is epexegetical, expanding on the meaning of the
previous words, while the tense of the verb is present). bevbaio" and its cognates were used
as technical terms in the papyri to speak of guaranteeing legal contracts (cf. Deissmann,
Bible Studies, 104–9, MM, 107, 108). Schlier (TDNT 1, 600–603) and others, therefore, have
been inclined to see a technical legal sense in most of the NT occurrences of these terms.
This is doubtful in the four passages (1 Cor 1:8; 2 Cor 1:21; Heb. 13:9 and here) where the
verb is employed of confirming persons. Rather, we are reminded of the Psalter (41:12;
119:28), and it is possible that Paul was influenced by this source, where the Lord is said to
strengthen his needy ones in their distress (cf. Harder, Paulus, 70, and BAG, 138).
    Although the whole phrase (bebaiouvmenoi th`/ pivstei) could be taken as a reference to
the Colossians‘ being progressively reinforced in their Christian conviction (or trust), as
Moule, 90, suggests, in the light of the parenthesis that immediately follows (―as you were
taught‖) and the parallel reference at chapter 1:23 it is better to understand ―faith‖ (pivsti")
as that which is the object of belief, the content of the teaching which Epaphras had
faithfully passed on to them. It was this faith they were to continue in (at 1:23 note the
active voice), for it was only by this faith (perhaps th`/ pistei is a dative of relation, but the
meaning is not significantly altered if we take it as instrumental) that they would be
consolidated (the corresponding passive referring to God‘s activity; cf. 1 Cor 1:8).
    perisswuvonte" ejn eujcaristiva/. Thanksgiving is referred to no fewer than six times
(seven if ejn [th`/] cavriti of 3:16 is included in the count) in the space of four short chapters
of Colossians (1:3, 12; 2:7; 3:15, 16, 17; 4:2; see O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings,
62–67). This is the first explicit exhortatory reference (at 1:12 in the context of Paul‘s
intercessory prayer there is an implied exhortation to the giving of thanks: see 30). The
clear indication is that joyful thanksgiving is to characterize the lives of these readers, no
doubt bearing in mind all the mighty things God had done on their behalf.
In the pagan world of Paul‘s day, although thanks to the gods were expressed publicly (as
evidenced in inscriptions), the public only shared in the thanksgiving from the outside, as it
were, so that the action was in effect a private affair. In Colossians the corporate nature of
thanksgiving is in view at least by implication here and explicitly at chapter 3:15–17.
eujcaristejw and its cognates in the NT mean to ―give thanks‖ and not simply to ―be
grateful.‖ This is not to say with Bornkamm (Studien, 188–203), Käsemann (Essays, 154)
and Lohse (32, 94) that the verb has acquired almost a technical significance meaning to
―confess Christ in the liturgy,‖ so that Paul is here exhorting the readers to praise the Lord
in hymnic confessions, especially 1:15–20 (see O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings,
71–75).

Explanation (2:6, 7)
    Verses 6 and 7 occupy a pivotal position in the letter. They serve as the basis of Paul‘s
interaction with the Colossian heresy (vv 8–23) having summarized much of what has
already been written in the epistle. The focus of attention is upon ―Christ Jesus as Lord‖
whom the Colossians received as their ―tradition‖ when they accepted the gospel at the
hands of Epaphras. This Christ Jesus is none other than the Lord of all, in both creation and
redemption (1:15–20), and he is the center of God‘s mystery (1:27; 2:2). By means of an
indicative-imperative form the readers, who have had many of the important ideas driven
home to their hearts, are admonished to conduct their lives as those who have been
incorporated into Christ. They have been securely rooted in him, they are progressively
being built up in Christ as they are reinforced in the faith they had been taught. As they live
under Christ‘s lordship they are to abound in thanksgiving, grateful to God for his mighty
actions for them. Christ Jesus was a more than adequate safeguard against the empty
traditions of men. Let them see that their way of life and thought conform continually to his
teaching.

Comment (2:8–15)
    8. blevpete mhv ti" uJma`" e[stai oJ sulagwgw`n. By means of a strong warning
(blejpete here means: ―beware,‖ ―be on your guard,‖ BAG, 143; other examples are: Mark
13:9; Phil 3:2; 2 John 8) the congregation is alerted to the dangers touched upon in verse 4.
They are to be on guard lest (normally the expression is mhv, etc with the subjunctive: 1 Cor
8:9; 10:12; Gal 5:15; cf. Mark 13:5; Acts 13:40; Heb. 12:25; but here the future indicative is
employed: BDF para. 369[2]; Moule, Idiom Book, 139; Moulton, Grammar, 192,
understands it as a cautious assertion meaning ―perhaps,‖ but the contexts suggest it is
stronger than this) anyone carry them off as booty or spoil. Although no one is named
(Bruce, 230, suggests Paul possibly had one particular teacher in view; cf. Masson, 121)
both writer and readers would have been able to identify the person(s) concerned (cf.
Lightfoot, 176, on this use of the indefinite ti"). The verb sulagwgejw is a rare
word—appearing nowhere else in the NT—probably meaning ―carry off as booty‖ or ―as a
captive‖ (so BAG, 776; cf. Lightfoot, 176) rather than ―rob‖ or ―despoil.‖ Accordingly the
word is used figuratively of carrying someone away from the truth into the slavery of error.
The term is a vivid one and shows how seriously Paul regarded the evil designs of those
trying to influence the congregation.
dia; th`" filosofiva" kai; kenh/" ajpavth". The method (diav) by which these spiritual
confidence tricksters might ensnare the community is through using ―philosophy and empty
deceit.‖ The term ―philosophy‖ (filosofiva) which occurs only here in the NT (the cognate
filovsofo", ―philosopher,‖ is used of the Epicureans and the Stoics at Acts 17:18), carried
a wide range of meanings describing all sorts of groups, tendencies and viewpoints within
the Greek and Jewish worlds (Michel, TDNT 9, 172–88), from the Greek pursuit of
knowledge and wisdom to the sects of Hellenistic Judaism which sought to present
themselves as ―philosophies‖ (so Philo designated the Torah as ―the ancestral philosophy [hJ
pavtrio" filosofiva,‖ Leg. 156; ―the philosophy according to Moses [hj kata; Mwu>sh`n
filosofiva],‖ Mut 223; while Josephus described the Pharisees, Sadducees and Essenes as
the three philosophies [trei`" yilosoyivai] within Judaism, Bell. 2.119; Ant 18.11; for
details see Bornkamm, Conflict, 140).
    As Bornkamm (TDNT 4, 808–10) and Lohse (95) have pointed out, various religious
groups sought to convince men that they were imparting philosophy. Even those who
practiced magic called themselves ―philosophers‖ as they sought by rights, initiations and
magical spells to capture the allegiance of men.
    Paul no doubt adopted the term here because it was used by the false teachers
themselves to refer to their own teachings in a positive way (cf. Wilckens, TDNT 7, 523).
But by the addition of the words ―and empty deceit‖ (kai; kenh`" ajpavth": the use of the
one preposition diav and the absence of the definite article before the second noun ajpavth"
show that the apostle is describing this particular philosophy and making no comment on
philosophy in general, a point already noted by Clement of Alexandria, Strom 6.8.62; cf.
Bengel 2, 460) he exposes it as a hollow sham, having no true content, seductive and
misleading (ajpavth can describe the seduction which comes from wealth, Mark 4:19; the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3:13; wicked deception generally, 2 Thess 2:10 or deceptive
desires, Eph 4:22; cf. BAG, 81). As ―deceitful‖ it stands opposed to the gospel, ―the word of
truth‖ (1:5), and to ―wisdom and knowledge‖ (2:3), while the designation of it as ―empty‖
(kenhv) sets this philosophy in sharp contrast to the mystery and its ―glorious riches‖ (to;
plou`to" th`" dovxh", 1:27), and Christ in whom all the treasures (qhsauroiv) of wisdom
and knowledge are hidden (2:3).
kata; th;n paravdosin tw`n ajnqrwvpwn. The false teaching is next described with reference
to its source— ―the tradition of men.‖ The teaching of the Greek philosophers, from Plato
onward, was passed on from teacher to pupil (e.g. Theaet 36, 198b). Further, the
―philosophy‖ to which the mysteries referred was also preserved by means of sacred
tradition, so that in the initiation rites the devotee received the holy teaching or ―sacred
word‖ (iJero;" lovgo") through which the divine revelation came. Later Gnostics used the
term paravdosi" (―tradition‖) of the authoritative teachings which, as revelation, were to be
preserved and passed on (for detailed examples see Delling, TDNT 4, 12, Wegenast,
Verständnis, 123–26, and Lohse, 95, 96). The importance of tradition in Judaism, described
in the m  as ―a fence around the law‖ (3:14), has already been noted (see 105).
    It is not possible from an examination of this phrase alone (hJ paravdosi" tw`n
ajnqrwvpwn) to determine the precise content of the ―tradition.‖ The words might be Jewish
or Gentile or both. At Mark 7:8 the same phrase refers to Pharisaic expositions of the
Jewish law, while at 1 Peter 1:18 (pat roparavdoto") it is probably Gentile (though some
have argued that this too is Jewish). In both places the vanity or emptiness of such
traditions is stressed (Bruce, 231). A decision regarding the content at Colossians 2:8 can
only be made by reference to other parts of the letter. But the manner in which the words
are introduced here does suggest that the false teachers had set forth their ―philosophy‖ as
―tradition‖ (paravdosi"), thereby pointing to its antiquity, dignity and revelational
character (cf. Michel, TDNT 9, 186). Paul, however, rejects any suggestion of divine origin.
This was a human fabrication standing over against the apostolic tradition which centered
on ―Christ Jesus as Lord.‖ Its false content was ―according to the elements of the universe
and not according to Christ.‖
kata; ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou kai; ouj kata; Cristovn. See the following note on
stoicei`a tou` kovsmou where it is argued, with the majority of recent commentators, that
the phrase denotes the ―elemental spirits of the universe,‖ the principalities and powers
which sought to tyrannize over the lives of men (cf. 2:10, 15). The phrase probably held an
important place in the syncretistic ―tradition‖ of the philosophy. The apostle sets a stark
contrast: whatever is in accordance with these demonic, personal powers stands over
against Christ, the one at the center of the apostolic tradition, and the person who embodies
God‘s mystery.
     9. o{ti ejn aujtw`/ katoikei` pa`n to; plhvrwma th`" qeovthto" swmatikw`". Paul
continues his polemical thrust as he makes plain to the readers why (o{ti) the ―philosophy‖
of the false teachers is ―not according to Christ‖ (the o{ti is causal, though it is not attached
to the blevpete of v 8 as if to give the reason for the warning; the view of Schille, Hymnen,
31–37, especially 31, that it is a recitative i{ti introducing a hymnic piece is rightly
criticized by Deichgräber, Gotteshymnus, 167–69; cf. Lähnemann,Kolosserbrief, 115; on
the question of a hymn in vv 9–15 see above). He focuses attention on the centrality of
Christ, whom the readers are to follow unswervingly, by resuming the phrase ―in him‖ (ejn
aujtw`/) of verse 7 and repeating it as a theme in the following verses (Lohse, 99). In fact it
runs like a scarlet thread through this whole section, verses 9–15: ―in him‖ (ejn aujtw`/) the
entire fullness of deity dwells bodily (v 9); ―in him‖ (ejn aujtw`/) you are filled (v 10); ―in
whom‖ (ejn w|/) you have been circumcised (v 11); ―with him‖ (aujtw/̀ sun-) you have been
buried, ―in whom‖ (ejn w|/) you also have been raised with him (v 12); God has made you
alive ―with him‖ (su;n auJtw`/, v 13); and he has led the principalities and powers in
triumphal procession ―in him‖ (ejn aujtw`/, v 15).
    In this statement of verse 9, words from the earlier hymn (1:19) are taken up and
applied (but not ―corrected‖ as some, such as Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 115, suppose)
with reference to the Colossian heresy: note the repetition of ejn aujtw`/ (―in him‖) in an
emphatic position, the verb katoikevw (―dwells‖) and pa`n to; plhvrwma (―all the fullness‖).
The high Christological statement serves as the basis for the application to the particular
needs of the congregation. Here, we note several significant points: (1) katoikevw
(―dwells‖) is used in the present tense; (2) the genitive ―of deity‖ (th`" qeovthto") more
precisely determines the meaning of ―fullness,‖ while (3) the addition of swmatikw`"
(―bodily‖) indicates the manner in which the fullness dwells in Christ.
    Although there was some doubt at chapter 1:19 as to whether pa`n to; plhvrwma (―all
the fullness‖) was the subject of the verb eujdovkhsen (―was pleased‖) no such ambiguity
exists here: pa`n to; plhvrwma is the subject of katoikei` so indicating that the entire
fullness of deity dwells in Christ. As noted above, the expression ―the entire (pa`n tov)
fullness‖ is tautologous and this suggests Paul is writing polemically to underscore the
point that the ―pleroma‖ is to be found exclusively in Christ (on the meaning of plhvrwma
see 51–53).
th`" qeovthto". The additional words ―of deity‖ specify what dwells in Christ in its entire
fullness. qeovth" (―deity‖), is the abstract noun from oJ qeov" (―God‖) and is to be
distinguished from hJ qeiovth" (―divine nature,‖ ―quality‖), the abstract from qei`o"
(―divine,‖ Rom 1:20; Wisd 18:19; cf. Lightfoot, 179, who illustrates the difference between
the two nouns in Plutarch‘s Moralia). The former is , the being God, i.e. the divine
essence or Godhead; the latter is divinitas, i.e. the divine quality, godlikeness (Meyer, 358).
Meyer adds: ―Accordingly, the essence of God, undivided and in its whole fullness, dwells
in Christ in His exalted state, so that He is the essential and adequate image of God (i. 15),
which He could not be if He were not possessor of the divine ―essence‖.
    Some recent exegetes have objected to the traditional exegesis of this phrase claiming
that the deity of Jesus Christ is not to be interpreted in static, ontological categories such as
those of ―substance‖ or ―essence,‖ but in soteriological and eschatological thought forms
that refer to God‘s working in Christ. It is true that in the immediate context the notion of
fullness as being imparted to the readers is in view (so v 10). However, the reception of
salvation, described in verse 10 as being filled in him alone, becomes meaningful only if he
is the one in whom the plenitude of deity is embodied. If the fullness of deity does not
reside in him then the Colossians‘ fullness would not amount to much at all—the very point
Paul is making over against the errorists‘ teaching on fullness. Further, a functional
Christology presupposes, and finds its ultimate basis in, an ontological Christology (Harris,
in NIDNTT, 3, 1193).
    katoikei` … swmatikw`". As distinct from chapter 1:19 where the aorist eujdovkhsen
katoikh`sai (―was pleased to dwell‖) occurs, here the present tense katoikei` (―dwells‖)
indicates that the whole fullness of God resides in the resurrected and exalted Christ (cf.
Schweizer, 108). The adverb of manner swmatikw`" indicates how the fullness of deity
dwells in Christ, but there is considerable difference of opinion as to its meaning. Moule
(92–94), for example, has listed five options:
i. ―as an organized body,‖ i.e. the totality of the Godhead is ―not distributed through a
     hierarchy of beings,‖ but is gathered into one ―organism‖ in Christ.
ii. ―expressing itself through the Body [of Christ, i.e. the Church].‖
iii. ―actually‖—in concrete reality, not in mere seeming.
iv. ―in essence.‖
v. ―assuming a bodily form,‖ ―becoming incarnate.‖
     View (i) suits the hypothesis that Paul had taken the term plhvrwma from the
vocabulary of the false teachers, but is not wholly dependent on it, if the ―philosophy‖ at
Colossae taught that the divine attributes were spread throughout the many heavenly
powers of which Christ was one. But there are some doubts as to whether this was actually
taught. Further, to express the organization in Christ of all these powers by a single adverb,
Moule (93) rightly claims, is doubtful. Caird (191) points out that this view, at least in the
form presented by Lohmeyer, requires us to understand ―body‖ as the universe (which is
contrary to Pauline usage) and ―fullness of deity‖ as lordship over that universe—but
―fullness of deity‖ must mean more than this.
(ii) puts too much weight on a single adverb, however attractive the view might be
otherwise (Moule, 93, and Caird, 191; after a careful assessment Best, Body, 120,
concludes that the Body of Christ metaphor is not in view here). Even its presentation by
Benoit (RB 63 [1956] 5–44) and subsequent development at the hands of Burger
(Schöpfung, 89), who understands it as an abbreviated expression connoting ―the new
creation,‖ is open to the same criticism (cf. Ernst, Pleroma, 101, 102).
     (iv) Moule claims is improbable if intelligible.
     This leaves us with (iii) and (v). The former is strongly advocated by Caird who
understands it, not of Paul combating some sort of docetic Christology such as was later
associated with Gnosticism but, ―in the light of v 17, where sw`ma (‗body‘) is used to
denote the solid reality of the new age in contrast with the shadow anticipations of it in the
legal systems of the age that is past‖ (192). Jervell‘s arguments (Imago, 223, 224, followed
by Lohse, 100) are essentially the same. View (v) which had the strong support of Lightfoot
(180; note Moule‘s treatment, 93, 94) runs into some difficulty with the present tense
katoikei` (―dwells‖; one might have expected a perfect, though Moule 93, raises the
possibility as to whether the present is being used here as a Greek perfect tense,
representing the continuance in the present of some state begun previously). Bruce, 232,
comments that the adverb swmatikw`" refers not to the incarnation as such, but to Christ‘s
complete embodiment of the plhvrwma.
     A final decision between (iii) and (v) is difficult. Lohse, 100, 101, is no doubt right
when he claims that the author chose the word ―bodily‖ in order to relate his statements to
the term ―body‖ (sw`ma). But which ―body‖? That referred to in chapter 2:17, the ―body‖ as
opposed to the ―shadow,‖ or the incarnate ―body,‖ cf. chapter 1:22, for example? On the
whole we are inclined to the last view (v) and understand the statement as meaning that the
fullness of deity dwells in Christ ―in bodily form.‖
     10. kai; ejste; ejn aujtw`/ peplhrwmevnoi. Paul‘s thought continues in a statement that is
correlative with verse 9: from the fullness of deity that dwells in the exalted Christ follows
the infilling of the Colossian Christians. There is clearly a play on the word ―fullness‖ here
(v 9 plhvrwma, v 10 peplhrwmevnoi), though the tense of the verb (a perfect) points to a
continuing state as the result of some prior action, and the passive voice suggests the
readers have been filled by God. The language and word order again draw attention to the
motif of incorporation—it is in union with Christ alone that they possess this fullness
already.
The apostle does not define the content with which these believers are filled; there are no
accompanying nouns (in the genitive or accusative cases) as might normally be expected.
To suggest that the reference is to the ―fullness of deity‖ is unlikely on grammatical
grounds apart from asserting too much. Elsewhere Paul often employs this language of
fullness to describe godly qualities or graces that he either desires or prays for with
reference to believers (Rom 15:13, ―joy and peace‖; Phil 1:11, ―the fruit of righteousness‖;
4:19, ―every need‖; and in Colossians itself, 1:9, ―the knowledge of his will‖; cf. Eph 3:19,
where the prayer is that the readers may be filled ―in the direction of [eij"] all the fullness of
God‖); or in some sense he is convinced they already possess (Rom 15:14, ―knowledge‖).
Here, unless we insert some comprehensive expression such as ―you have come to fullness
of life in him‖ (RSV; Martin, NCB, 80, 81; cf. Caird, 192), and assume the Colossians are so
filled, it is better to understand Paul as meaning ―you are filled in him‖ (Burger, Schöpfung,
90, prefers ―you are infilled in him‖). As such he is affirming the presence of salvation
among them. Perhaps as Dibelius-Greeven, 29, have suggested, Paul is employing a slogan
the false teachers were adopting when they spoke of ―fullness of life‖ to their followers,
and asserting by way of contrast that it is only in Christ that the Colossians have been
filled. This could explain the use of the unusual expression.


    It has already been made plain that the Colossian Christians are to conduct their lives in
the light of God‘s gracious work in their midst (1:9–14; cf. 2:6, 7). The possession of all
things in Christ in no way absolved them from the need for continual growth (an error into
which some of the Corinthians had fallen: note the biting irony of 1 Cor 4:8, ―Already you
are filled! Already you have become rich!‖ Cf Phil 3:12–14). However, there was little
danger that the Colossians would misunderstand Paul‘s realized eschatology in this way (cf.
Caird, 192; Schweizer, 109). Theirs was the opposite temptation of thinking that ―fullness‖
was beyond their grasp unless they took sufficient account of the spiritual powers and
followed a strict discipline of ritual and ascetic observance.
    o{" ejstin hJ kefalh; pavsh" ajrch`" kai; ejxousiva". The readers need not pay their
respects to the principalities and powers. For the one in whom they are complete is Lord
and Master of such beings. While in apocalyptic thought the final overthrow of evil forces
was not expected until the end of the present age (cf. Rev 19:11–16) here the present rule of
Christ is emphasized. These words hark back to the language of the hymn where Christ is
said to be creator of all powers and authorities (1:16) as well as their sustainer (1:17). He is
―head‖ over the principalities and powers for God has divested them of all authority in him
(2:15). Although they continue to exist, inimical to man and his interests (cf. Rom 8:38, 39)
their final defeat is inevitable (cf. 1 Cor 15:24–28).
    By directing his attention to the present rule of Christ (o{" ejstin hJ keyalhv; the textual
variant o{ ejstin is probably due to assimilation to what was a common expression, 1:24,
3:14; certainly the relative clause refers to Christ, not the ―fullness‖; cf. BDF, para. 132[2],
Lohse, 101, and Schweizer, 109) Paul may well have been asserting an emphasis that was
needed at Colossae, for as has been suggested it is possible that the spirit-powers (perhaps
even angelic beings) were adopted by the false teachers as mediators, so giving to inferior
members an allegiance due only to the head.
When calling Christ the ―head‖ (kefalhv) over all rule and authority Paul stops short of
designating the cosmic powers a ―body‖ (aw`ma) organically united under Christ‘s rule
(against Dibelius-Greeven, 29, and Lohmeyer, 107). Nowhere in Pauline teaching is the
cosmos called Christ‘s body; rather the church is so described (1:18, 24) and through it
alone is the cosmos to be brought into unity with him (Eph. 1:10; 3:10).
     11. Paul continues the theme of incorporation in Christ. He has already mentioned, by
means of a perfect tense (v 10, ejstev … peplhrwmevnoi), that the believers have been filled
in him (ejn aujtw`/). He now elaborates on this describing their participation in Christ‘s death,
burial and resurrection with a series of aorist tenses: ―in whom you were circumcised‖
(perietmhvqhte, v 11), ―you were buried with him‖ (suntafevnte", v 12), ―in him you
were raised with him‖ (sunhgevrqhte, v 12), and ―he made you alive with him‖
(sunezwopoivhsen, v 13).
     ejn w|/ kai; perietmhvqhte peritomh`/ ajceiropoihvtw/. (On ejn w|/ kaiv see v 12). While the
death, burial and resurrection themes are commonly related to the motif of union with
Christ in Paul‘s letters (Rom 6:3–6; 7:1–6; 8:17; 2 Cor 1:3–9; 4:7–14; 5:14–17; 7:3; 13:4;
Gal 2:19, 20; 6:14, 15; Eph 2:5, 6; Phil 3:9–11; Col 2:20; 3:1–4, 9, 10; 1 Thess 4:14; 5:10;
cf. especially Tannehill‘s treatment, Dying) the sudden introduction of circumcision in this
context is unusual. Several have claimed that its presence here can only be accounted for
because of its being advocated by the false teachers (cf. Lightfoot, Williams,
Beasley-Murray, Caird, etc). Paul‘s choice of language here would be particularly apt if
circumcision was one feature of that syncretism being inculcated upon the congregation
(Bruce, 234, 235). If so, we might have expected, as in Galatians, some direct
condemnation of the practice, but in verses 16–23 there is no reference to it. Schweizer
(110, 111; cf. Jews, Greeks and Christians, 250) claims that the references to circumcision
and uncircumcision in verses 11 and 13 have been ―spiritualized‖ and are not directed
polemically against any particular practice of the false teachers. Lohse (102), on the other
hand, suggests that circumcision at Colossae was not considered to be a sign of the
covenant that required obedience to the OT law. Rather, it was understood as a sacramental
rite by which a person entered the community and gained salvation. But there is no
contemporary evidence for this and we cannot say with certainty why Paul introduced the
circumcision motif at this point (cf. Halter, Taufe, 609).
     The verb peritevmnw meaning to ―cut (off) around‖ (BAG, 652) occurred frequently in
the LXX as a ritual technical term to denote physical circumcision, an outward sign of the
covenant between Yahweh and his people (cf. Gen 17:10–14, 23–27; Exod 4:25; 12:44, 48;
Lev 12:3, etc). Within the OT the term came to be used in a transferred and ethical sense
pointing to the ―circumcision of the heart‖ (cf. Deut 10:16; Jer 4:4; Ezek 44:7) in which
Israel was to give evidence of its true circumcision by complete obedience to the
commandments of the Lord, the covenant God. The OT did not suggest, however, that this
spiritual circumcision was to replace or be a substitute for physical circumcision. 1QS 5:5,
―[Each man] shall circumcise in the community the foreskin of evil inclination and of
stiffness of neck that they may lay a foundation of truth for Israel, for the community of the
everlasting covenant‖ (Vermes‘ translation), shows that in the NT period a figurative and
spiritualized view of circumcision was not unknown within the framework of Palestinian
Judaism (Meyer, TDNT 6, 79). Here true circumcision was understood eschatologically (cf.
Schweizer, 110), since it served as the basis for the everlasting covenant.
     The apostle speaks of the Colossians being circumcised ―with a circumcision not made
with hands‖ (peritomh`/ ajceiropoihvtw/; by characterizing their circumcision in this way it
is immediately distinguished from what is elsewhere meant by circumcision, cf. Meyer,
363). The adjective ceiropoihvto" (―made with hands‖) was employed in the LXX to
denote idols (Lev 26:1; Isa 2:18; at 16:12 it is applied to an idol‘s sanctuary), false gods
(Isa 11:9) or images (Lev 26:30); it therefore described the gods as made with men‘s hands
and which stood over against the living God. In all of its NT occurrences ceiropoivhto"
(―made with hands‖) is used to set forth the contrast between what is constructed by man
and the work of God (Lohse, TDNT 9, 436; cf. Mark 14:58; Acts 7:48; 17:24; Eph 2:11; Heb
9:11, 24). To speak of something ―not made with hands‖ (ajceiropoivhto") is to assert that
God himself has created it: so the heavenly house to which Paul refers (2 Cor 5:1), that will
be given to each one of us at death, is ―not made with hands,‖ that is, it is wholly a divine
creation; similarly the temple that Jesus said he would erect within three days is ―not made
with hands‖ (Mark 14:58). When Paul at Colossians 2:11 speaks of a circumcision ―not
made with hands‖ (ajceiropoivhto") he sets in antithesis Jewish circumcision (which was
done by the hand of man) with the work of God which the readers had experienced. God
himself had decisively effected the change from the old life to the new (a point that is
further underscored by the passive verbs used in the paragraph to signify the divine activity:
perietmhvqhte, suntafevnte", sunhgevrqhte; cf. sunezwopoivhsen, the subject of which
is God), a theme which the apostle emphatically struck at chapter 1:21, 22. The precise
nature of this circumcision can only be suggested in the light of the following phrases,
particularly the parallel reference to the ―circumcision of Christ.‖ By way of anticipation
we understand this latter phrase as a reference to Christ‘s death, and the words ―you were
circumcised‖ to mean ―you died,‖ that is, in his death.
     ejn th`/ ajpekduvsei tou` swvmato" th/" sarkov". This is a key phrase in the argument of
verses 11 and 12 and the meaning given to it determines the answers to several other
questions raised by the passage. On the whole scholars have ranged themselves in
adherence to two main lines of interpretation:
(1) The first view understands the phrase in the light of the Pauline teaching on the ―flesh‖
(savrx) to mean ―putting off the old nature‖ (cf. Col 3:9). Accordingly, ―body of flesh‖ is
equivalent to ―the body of this death‖ (to; sw`ma tou` uanavtou touvtou, Rom 7:24) or ―the
body of sin‖ (to; sw`ma th`" aJmartiva", Rom 6:6). The imagery is said to relate to baptism
(cf. Gal 3:27, for an example of similar symbolism, namely, of baptism and putting on
Christ) so that the stripping off of the old nature, which is said to occur in baptism, is then
described as a spiritual counterpart of circumcision. It is further argued that such a use of
th`" sarkov", which is virtually equivalent to the adjective ―sensual,‖ is paralleled in the
same chapter, verse 18, ―by his sensual mind‖ (nou`" th`" sarkov"). Exponents of this view
concede that the almost identical expression, ―in the body of his flesh‖ (ejn tw`/ swvmati th`"
sarko;" aujtou`, 1:22), which points to Christ‘s physical body, has a different meaning from
the reference here, the significant omission being the word ―his‖ (aujtou` (Lähnemann,
Kolosserbrief, 121, 122, and Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 144, 145, do endeavor to relate
the two references while insisting on their basic difference of meaning). According to this
interpretation (which normally understands the following phrase ―the circumcision of
Christ‖ as meaning ―the circumcision which Christ gave,‖ that is, Christian circumcision
which is baptism, see below) Paul is saying that Christians do not need to submit to
circumcision, for baptism has now replaced it. (With some variations see the comments of
Lohse, 103, Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 144, 145, Schnackenburg, Baptism, 68, and
Caird, 192–94.)
    (2) The second approach takes the phrase ―in putting off the body of flesh‖ as a
reference to the death of Christ (so Moule, 95, 96, Beasley-Murray, Baptism, 152, 153, cf.
RevExp 70 [1973] 474, 475, and Gundry, , 40–42), thereby squaring with the earlier
mention of his death at chapter 1:22, ―the body of his flesh‖ (ejn tw`/ swvmati th`" sarko;"
aujtou`). This interpretation has the added advantage of providing a plausible explanation of
verse 15, namely that in Christ‘s death God divested (ajpekdusavmeno", the cognate verb to
the rare ajpevkdusi") the principalities and powers, leading them in his triumphal
procession.Assuming the two phrases, ―in the stripping away of the body of flesh‖ and ―in
the circumcision of Christ,‖ are construed alike (by regarding the two genitives as
objective), then the meaning is that the body of flesh was tripped off when Christ was
circumcised, that is, when he died; the whole statement is ―a gruesome figure for death‖
(Beasley-Murray, Baptism, 152). Here is a circumcision which entailed not the stripping off
of a small portion of flesh but the violent removal of the whole body in death.
    But several objections have been leveled against this approach: first, the absence of any
noun or pronoun such as ―his‖ (aujto`) means that the expression ―the body of flesh‖
belongs to the subject of the clause, i.e. believers who have been circumcised
(perietmhvqhte). It is argued that the phrase is different in meaning from the earlier
reference ―in the body of his flesh,‖ (1:22). But the omission (which Lohse, 103, and Caird,
193, consider to be serious) may have occurred because ―the identification of the baptized
with Christ is regarded as so close as to render a specifying pronoun out of place,‖ Moule,
95, or because the words ―of Christ‖ in the following phrase made clear whose body of
flesh is stripped off in circumcision (so Gundry, , 41).
    Second, the idea of stripping off the physical body at death is said to smack of dualism
and contradict Paul‘s theology of resurrection (Caird, 193). However, it is possible that the
term ajpevkdusi" (―putting off‖), perhaps even a Pauline coinage, was chosen by him to
underscore the point that Christ‘s death was a violent and gruesome one, and to say no
more than this. This language is clearly metaphorical, like the statements about being
clothed and unclothed at death to which Caird refers (2 Cor 5) in his criticisms of this view.
On the whole we prefer the second alternative and understand the phrase as pointing to
Christ‘s violent death.
ejn th`/ peritomh`/ tou` Cristou`. In our view, then, the ―circumcision of Christ‖ is not his
circumcision as a Jewish infant of eight days old (Luke 2:21); nor is it the ―circumcision
which belongs to Christ,‖ understood as a Christian circumcision in tacit contrast to the
circumcision which belongs to Moses and the patriarchs, and therefore a periphrasis for
baptism (though many exegetes take it this way). It is better to regard the statement as
denoting the circumcision that Christ underwent, that is, his crucifixion, of which his literal
circumcision was at best a token by way of anticipation (cf. Bruce, 234). By interpreting the
phrase in this way as denoting Christ‘s death and not as a synonym for baptism, verse 11 is
then seen to provide a consistent application of the symbolism of circumcision, and it is not
until the clause ―buried with him in baptism‖ (v 12) is reached that the baptismal language
actually begins (cf. Beasley-Murray, Baptism, 153).
    The primary elements of the apostolic gospel were: ―Christ died for our sins … he was
buried … he was raised …‖ (1 Cor 15:3, 4). These same elements are clearly discernible in
Colossians 2:11, 12 (on the above interpretation) as Paul uses first the language of
circumcision (v 11), then that of baptism (v 12): Christ‘s body was stripped off in his death,
he was buried and he was raised. Here the believers‘participation in those saving events is
also asserted (cf. Rom 6:3, 4): you died in his death (that is, you were circumcised in his
circumcision; this language takes the place of sustaurovw, ―crucify together with,‖ or some
similar verb which would conform to the sun-verbs that follow, so Tannehill, Dying, 49),
you were buried with him and raised with him.
    12. suntayevnte" aujtw`/ ejn tw`/ baptismw`/. If the believers at Colossae were
circumcised in Christ‘s circumcision, that is, they died in his death, then it immediately
follows that they ―were buried with him in baptism‖ (the textual support of baptivsmw`/, a
―washing,‖ ―dipping,‖ P46 B D* etc, is as strong as that for baptivsmati, the Christian term
meaning ―baptism.‖ The former word is less common and therefore more likely to have
been changed by copyists to the latter, cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 623). sunqavptw
(―bury with‖) which appears only at Romans 6:4 and here in the NT is used in a figurative
sense of the believer‘s being buried with his Lord in baptism (BAG, 789). As the burial of
Christ (1 Cor 15:4) set the seal upon his death, so the Colossians‘ burial with him in
baptism shows that they were truly involved in his death and laid in his grave. It is not as
though they simply died like Jesus died, or were buried as he was laid in the tomb (for a
survey and critique of this popular view, with special reference to Rom 6, see
Beasley-Murray, Baptism, 131–46). Rather, they died with him on the cross and were laid
in his grave (cf. Beasley-Murray, RevExp 70 [1973] 475). The burial proves that a real death
has occurred and the old life is now a thing of the past. Those who have been buried with
Christ ―through baptism into death‖ (Rom 6:4) can no longer go on living as slaves to sin.
    ejn w|/ kai; sunhgevrqhte. Not only did the readers die with Christ in his death and were
buried with him in baptism. They were also raised with him in resurrection. Having
previously set forth the negative side, the apostle now turns to the positive (cf. J. D. G.
Dunn, Baptism in the Holy Spirit [London, SCM, 1970] 154: American edition [SBT, 2nd
Ser; 15; Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1970]), and does so in a statement that is particularly
strong, so underlining this aspect of the apostolic kerygma: (a) the finite verb
sunhgevruhte, as distinct from the preceding participle, receives the emphasis (so Lohse,
104, Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief 122, and Schweizer, 112); (b) the expressions which
expand this note of resurrection are full; and (c) the theme of new life is taken up in verse
13. Several features of this resurrection description are to be observed:
(1) The Colossians have been raised with Christ. A strong case has been made out by
Beasley-Murray (Baptism, 153, 154; cf. RevExp 70 [1973] 476), who is followed by others
(English-speaking exegetes have often taken this line: cf. Abbott, 251, 252, Scott, 45, etc
and note the RSV NEB, TEV), in favor of taking ejn w\/ as ―in which,‖ that is, as a reference to
baptism, and so he translates the verse as: ―Buried with Him in baptism, in which you were
also raised with Him through faith in the working of God‖ (Baptism, 154). He considers
that the statement ―you were raised with him‖ (sunhgevruhte) is more naturally regarded
as set in parallelism with ―you were buried with him‖ (suntafevnte" aujtw`/), the latter
words ―with him‖ (aujtw`/) binding the two verbs together. Also to read the words ejn w\/ as
―in him‖ (rather than ―in which[baptism]‖) Beasley-Murray argues is to cause a separation
between the two elements of baptism, with the result that Paul is asserting that the believer
is buried with Christ in baptism but raised with him in some other way. So he contends it is
simpler and more natural to refer the relative pronoun to its immediate antecedent, namely,
―in baptism.‖
     Our preference, however, in spite of these arguments is to take it as pointing to Christ
(―in whom‖; cf. Lohmeyer, 108, Schnackenburg, Baptism, 69, Lohse, 104, Grundmann,
TDNT 7, 792) and stating that we were raised with him. Attention has already been drawn to
the theme of being ―in Christ.‖ The expressions ―in him‖ and ―in whom‖ are used again and
again throughout the paragraph to show that the Colossians are complete in Christ alone. It
is therefore more consistent with the rest of the passage to interpret ejn w\/ as ―in him,‖ rather
than ―in it‖ (i.e. baptism), particularly as the same expression at verse 11, ejn w\/ kaiv, can
only refer to Christ and is rendered ―in him also.‖ Further, it is not clear why the theme of
baptism ought to be carried through consistently to the second half of the verse as
Beasley-Murray contends (RevExp 70 [1973] 476). In the light of the exegesis above (which
is in part indebted to Beasley-Murray), baptism is not linked with the death of Jesus—the
circumcision imagery serves this purpose. At best baptism would refer to only two of a
total three elements, that is, Christ‘s burial and resurrection, but not his death (in Rom 6
baptism is tied in with the death and burial). Finally, although the expression ―in him‖ may
seem rather unusual when joined to a verb prefixed by sun- (sunhgevrqhte, ―you were
raised with‖) Ephesians 2:6 places ―with‖ and ―in Christ‖ next to each other in the same
way: ―and raised us up with him and made us sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ
Jesus‖ (kai; sunhvgeiren … ejn Cristw`/ ÆIhsou`). Because the reference there is specifically
to Christ Jesus, rather than to a personal pronoun that could be rendered ―him‖ or ―it,‖ there
is no ambiguity.
    Some have allowed thoughts concerning baptism to dominate their exegesis of the
passage: first, by interpreting the statements about circumcision in verse 11 as equivalent to
or an explanation of baptism, and second, by wishing to interpret the baptismal motif as
applying to both parts of verse 12. Instead it is the dying and rising with Christ theme that
is central to the passage: dying with him in his death is spelled out in verse 11 by means of
circumcision terminology; being buried with him in baptism is then asserted in verse 12a,
while being raised with Christ through faith receives the emphasis in the latter half of this
verse. Of the three elements the accent falls on the first and third, namely, the death and
resurrection (rather than the burial in baptism), for it is these statements that commence
with the emphatic ―in him also‖ (ejn w\/ kaiv), which employ a finite verb rather than a
dependent participle (perietmhvqhte and sunhgevrqhte) and which are taken up, though in
a somewhat different way, in verse 13. Baptismal statements are not developed in the
passage.
(2) The resurrection of the Colossians with Christ has already taken place: it is described
by means of an aorist tense sunhgevrqhte (―you were raised‖). This is not to suggest that
the eschatology of Colossians is fully realized (see on 3:1–4); the future element is
mentioned as the revelation of that life which is currently hidden in Christ with God (3:3,
4), not as the resurrection of the dead.
    It is sometimes said (cf. E. Grässer, ―Kol 3, 1–4 als Beispiel einer Interpretation
secundum homines recipientes,‖ ZTK 64 [1967] 139–68, especially 147, 148) that
Colossians (here and at 3:1) and Ephesians (cf. 2:5, 6), in speaking of Christians as already
raised with Christ, are at variance with the ―genuine‖ Pauline letters where their
resurrection remains a hope for the future (ct. 2 Cor 4:14; Phil 3:11). Romans 6:5–8 is said
to have particular relevance here: ―If we have been united with him in his death, we will
certainly also be united with him in his resurrection … But if we have died with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him.‖
    Now it may be that the notion of the believer‘s participation in the risen life of Christ
finds clearer expression here at Colossians 2:12 (cf. 3:1 and Eph 2:6) than elsewhere in
Paul‘s letters. But that is not to suggest it is absent from the earlier epistles or that someone
else is responsible for the Colossians phraseology so giving clearer expression to the
apostle‘s central thought than Paul himself could give! (cf. Bruce, 236).
Whether we regard the future tenses of Romans 6:5, 8 as logical futures (if A is true, then B
will also be true) rather than real ones, or not (Caird, 194, regards them as logical futures,
while Tannehill, Dying, 10–12, rejects the suggestion), it is clear that in Romans 6:11, 13,
where Paul bids his readers present themselves as alive to God, the apostle believes that
they as Christians enjoy a new sort of life here and now (G. M. Styler, ―The Basis of
Obligation in Paul‘s Christology and Ethics, Christ and Spirit in the New Testament.
Studies in Honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. B. Lindars and S. S. Smalley
[Cambridge: University Press, 1973] 181–83; cf. Moule, Origin, 124; on Rom 6 see
Bornkamm, Experience, 71–86, and Schnackenburg, Baptism, 30–61). For as Caird (194)
pointedly asks: How could Christians be expected to ―walk in newness of life‖ (Rom 6:4),
to conduct their lives on the assumption they are ―dead to sin and alive to God in Christ
Jesus‖ (6:9), or to behave ―as men who have been brought from death to life‖ (6:13) if they
are still dead and buried with no hope of resurrection before the last trumpet? Styler
(Christ, 182, 183) also draws attention to 2 Corinthians 4:10, 11 which refers to the
experience of the resurrection in this present earthly life (cf. 2 Cor 13:4), as well as
Galatians 2:19, 20 which speaks not of ―the final sharing of the risen life of Christ‖ but a
real sharing in the here and now of that life ―in the flesh.‖
     Although it is only in Colossians and Ephesians that the apostle speaks of having been
raised with Christ as a past event, these references in the earlier epistles presume the
present experience of the resurrection life in Christ (Beasley-Murray, Baptism, 155). The
differences of language may partly be accounted for because of the different circumstances
that called forth the letters. At Romans 6, in seeking to answer the question: ―Shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound?‖ (v 1), the apostle asserts that the believer is no
longer a slave to sin because he has been crucified with Christ. He has been freed from the
dominion of this slave driver. He participates in the new life now and is to walk in that
newness of life. The emphasis of the passage falls upon the believer counting himself dead
to sin, not letting sin reign in his mortal body, presenting himself to God, surrendering his
members to him as instruments of righteousness, and so on. To have asserted that one had
already been raised with Christ in the context of Romans 6 might have led to a smug
self-satisfaction or triumphalism (as in the case of 1 Cor 4:8, ―Already you have been
filled! Already you have become rich!‖) because it was thought that since salvation had
already been given fully and completely in the present there was nothing left to do but to
glory in it (cf. Tannehill, Dying, 10–12).
     But this was not the danger at Colossae. The false suggestion was that the believers
were not complete in Christ. They needed to follow a strict discipline of ritual and ascetic
observance and to take sufficient account of the spiritual powers if they were to proceed
along the path to perfection, to ―fullness of life.‖ Against this the apostle asserts that the
Colossian Christians had already been raised with Christ (cf. Schnackenburg, Baptism, 71).
     (3) This is not to suggest, however, that the Colossians are being encouraged to fall into
a fanatical enthusiasm of the kind mentioned in 2 Timothy 2:18 with its catchcry: ―The
resurrection has already taken place‖ (ajnavsthsin h[dh gegonevnai), and the implication
that all eschatology has been fully realized. Resurrection with Christ means that those who
have been raised with him have been raised through faith in God‘s power (ejnevrgeia is here
the object of faith, cf. Eph 1:19–21; on the meaning of ejnevrgeia see on 1:29), that same
power which brought Christ back from the dead and which energizes them and maintains
the new life within them. In fact, the new life is nothing less than Christ‘s resurrection life
imparted to all the members of his body (Bruce, 236).
     13. With the words of this verse the standpoint changes. No longer is the Christian
viewed as having been united with Christ in his death, burial and resurrection; rather, he is
seen from the position of having been truly dead in trespasses and sins in those earlier days
of his paganism, but now made alive by God in Christ. The movement of thought (cf .
Dibelius-Greeven, 31, Lohmeyer, 113, Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 168) is indicated by
the change in subject from ―you‖ to ―he,‖ that is, to God (note the specific mention in v 12,
―God who raised him [Jesus] from the dead‖) who has mercifully acted in his Son.
Nevertheless there is a connection with the preceding in that the nature of the resurrection
life is explained in what follows (cf. Schweizer, 113).
kai; uJma`" nekrou;" o[nta" … sunezwopoivhsen uJma`" su;n aujtw`/. As at chapter 1:21, 22
(see 64–66) a sharp contrast is drawn between the readers‘ pre-Christian past and their
present standing in Christ (in the earlier instance the potev, ―once,‖ and the nu`n, ―now,‖
were specifically mentioned; see Tachau, Einst, 84–87, cf. Conzelmann, 144, and Burger,
Schöpfung, 98). Again the wonder of the salvation that has been experienced is contrasted
with the lost situation from which God has freed them. The past is recalled not because the
emphasis falls upon it (here the previous condition is described by means of a participle,
―being dead,‖ o[nta", the action of God by the finite verb, ―he made alive,‖
sunezwopoivhsen), but to draw attention to the wonder of God‘s quickening the Colossians
with Christ.
     Terms akin to those used in verses 11 and 12 are employed here though with different
meanings: e.g. ―dead‖ (nekrouv", cf. ejk nekrw`n, v 12, and the idea of dying with Christ, v
11), ―uncircumcision,‖ (cf. v 11, ―you were circumcised with a circumcision not made with
hands‖), the repetition of ―flesh‖ (savrx, cf. v 11) and ―quickened‖ (cf. ―you were raised
with,‖ v 12).
     Paul proceeds to describe the former condition of the Colossians: kai; uJma`" nekrou;"
o[nta" ktl. (Note the fuller treatment in Eph 2:1–6.) Apart from the literal use which
denotes physical death (e.g. Rom 14:9; cf. Bultmann, TDNT 4, 892–94), terms for death are
used by the apostle to speak of being united with Christ in his death (cf. v 20). In addition,
the adjective ―dead‖ (nekroiv) is employed figuratively to describe the state of being lost or
under the dominion of death (note the present participle, ―being‖ o[nta"). It is sometimes
called spiritual death and denotes a state of alienation or separation from God caused by sin
(the description is not simply proleptic, ―liable to eternal death,‖ as Meyer suggested in his
comment on Eph 2:1 ([Critical and Exegetical Hand-book to the Epistle to the Ephesians.
Tr M. J. Evans and W. P. Dickson (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1884] 92), but points to
the present condition of those apart from Christ as being without spiritual life).
toi`" paraptwvmasin kai; th`/ ajkrobustiva/ th`" sarko;" uJmw`n. This wretched and culpable
condition had been caused by their trespasses and sinful nature (the datives toi`"
paraptwvmasin and th`/ ajkrobustiva/ are probably causal, cf. Rom 11:20; so BDF, para.
196; Lightfoot, 184, von Soden, 48, Williams, 94, Lohse, 107, Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene,
168; at the same time it is likely that the words are descriptive of their previous
circumstances: cf. Moule, 97; some early scribes [cf. P46 A C etc], by inserting the preposition
ejn, ―in,‖ apparently understood it this way). paravptwma (―false step,‖ ―transgression,‖
―sin,‖ so BAG, 621; cf. Michaelis, TDNT 6, 170–73), a term occurring rather frequently in
Paul (elsewhere in the NT at Matt 6:14, 15 [some MSs], and Mark 11:25), is one of several
words for sin which particularly emphasizes the deliberate act of disobedience with its
fateful consequences. In the LXX the noun, like the cognate verb parapivptw (―fall beside,‖
―go astray,‖ ―err,‖ ―sin‖), was used for words expressing conscious and deliberate sinning
against God (―rebellion,‖ Job 36:9; Ezek 14:11; 18:22; ―unfaithfulness,‖ Ezek 14:13; 15:8;
18:24; 20:27; ―injustice,‖ Ezek 3:20; 18:26). Paul in Romans 5:15–18, 20 employs the term
in the singular to describe Adam‘s disobedience (the actual sin of Gen 3 is in view) through
which sin entered the world (Rom 5:12). ―Trespasses‖ (in the plural) describe the actions
by which all men rebel against God (Rom 5:16; 2 Cor 5:19; cf. Gal 6:1), and for which
Christ was given up to death (Rom 4:25) in order that we might receive forgiveness of them
(2 Cor 5:19; Eph 1:7; and Col 2:13).


    If the first term points to the acts of rebellion against God as a cause of spiritual death
then the second, which is closely conjoined, indicates that the lives of those outside of
Christ are in a state of permanent disobedience. They live in the uncircumcision of their
flesh (th`/ ajkrobustiva/ th`" sarko;" uJmw`n). ajkrobustiva (―uncircumcision‖; cf. Schmidt,
TDNT 1, 225, 226), which occurs some twenty times in the NT, is found only in Paul, apart
from Acts 11:3. He often uses the word to designate pagans (Rom 2:25–27; 3:30; 4:9–12; 1
Cor 7:18, 19; Gal 2:7; 5:6; 6:15; Eph 2:11; Col 3:11), and in this context the term which
stands in contrast to the language of verse 11 (―in him also you were circumcised in a
circumcision not made with hands,‖ see above 114–116) since verse 13 describes their
pre-Christian condition while the earlier reference speaks of the change wrought in Christ,
is to be understood in two senses. First, there is a reference to their being physically
uncircumcised: the Colossians were Gentiles. But this of itself did not mean that they were
spiritually dead. Physical ―uncircumcision‖ was a symbol of their spiritual alienation from
God and his covenant of grace (Eph 2:11, 12; cf. Moule, 97, Schweizer, 114, Caird, 194,
195); they were both heathen and godless (Lohse, 107).
    sunezwopoivhsen uJma`" su;n aujtw`/. But the uncircumcision of these Gentiles has been
removed by the ―circumcision not made with hands‖ (2:11) in the death ot Christ, and God
has made them alive with him (note the aorist sunezwopoivhsen; uJma`" is repeated for the
sake of emphasis [it has the adequate support of a
    * A C K
             81 614 etc]; its omission from some manuscripts was probably due to its being
thought by scribes to be superfluous while its replacement with hJma`" in P46 B 33 etc was
probably to bring it into line with the following hJmi`n. In other words, it is the reading
which explains the others; cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 623). zwopoievw (―make
alive,‖ ―give life to‖) was used as a simple synonym for ejgeivrw (―raise‖) when describing
the eschatological raising from the dead (cf. 1 Cor 15:22 with Rom 8:11; Bultmann, TDNT
2, 874, 875). Only here and in Ephesians 2:5 is the compound suzwopoievw (―make alive
together with‖) to be found, though the additional phrase ―with him‖ (su;n aujtw`/; on the
meaning of the expression ―with Christ‖ see 169–171) indicates that the prefix here is
important. The Colossians have come to life with Christ, who was dead and rose again;
their new life, then, is a sharing in the new life which he received when he rose from the
dead. It is only in union with him that death is vanquished and new life, an integral part of
God‘s new creation, is received. Further, the following words make plain that the giving of
this life is an act of pure grace (carisavmeno") since it is related to the forgiveness of sins.
carisavmeno" hJmi`n pavnta ta; paraptwvmata The suggestion that verses 13c-15 were a
fragment of a confession formulated in hymnic phrases is discussed in the preceding
section (―Form,‖ 104). Those who have advocated this consider that the forgiveness of sins
is thematic standing at the beginning of the confession (so Lohse, 106, also his article in
Einheit, 276–84; note Martin‘s variation on this Reconciliation, 1974, 117). However true
this suggestion about a confessional statement may be, the words concerning forgiveness
are to be interpreted in their immediate context and this has to do with new life in Christ.
    God has made alive together with him because he has forgiven us you all our sins (the
relationship of the participle carisavmeno", ―having forgiven,‖ to the finite verb
sunexwopoivhsen, ―he made alive with,‖ is causal; Abbott, 254, von Soden, 49, cf. Meyer,
373; however, Grundmann, TDNT 7, 792, understands the participle as explanatory of the
preceding). Because he had remitted all (pavnta) our sins the cause of spiritual death was
done away. ―Whether a man is morally and spiritually dead or alive depends on his
relationship with God, the one source of life; and the relationship, once severed by sin, can
be restored only by forgiveness‖ (Caird, 195).
     carivzomai (―give freely or graciously as a favor‖; with the dative of the person and the
accusative of the thing = ―remit,‖ ―forgive,‖ ―pardon‖) is employed here and at Ephesians
4:32 of God‘s forgiving men, while at Colossians 3:13 (cf. 2 Cor 2:7, 10; 12:13; Eph 4:32)
it is used of men‘s forgiving one another (cf. Conzelmann, TDNT 9, 397). Perhaps its use
here (since it is the only occasion in Paul where the full expression to ―forgive trespasses‖
is found) may be due to the fact that it is a suitable verb for the cancellation of a debt (cf.
Luke 7:42, 43; BAG, 876, 877).
     The change of person from ―you‖ to ―us‖ (hJmi`n) indicates that Paul, along with other
Jewish Christians, as well as the readers who were Gentile believers, alike had been
―forgiven.‖
14. to; kaqÆ hJmw`n ceirovgrayon toi`" dovgmasin o{ h\ uJpenantivon hJmi`n. God has not only
removed the debt; he has also destroyed the document on which it was recorded.
ceirovgrafon denotes a ―document,‖ especially a ―note of indebtedness‖ written in one‘s
own hand as a proof of obligation (cf. BAG, 880, and Lohse, TDNT 9, 435). This meaning is
well-attested in both the Jewish and Greco-Roman world (for details see Lohse, TDNT 9,
435). A common thought in Judaism was that of God keeping accounts of man‘s debt,
calling in the debt through angels and imposing a just judgment based on the records kept
in the ledger (cf. Rabbi Akiba‘s illustration of God as a shopkeeper, m  3:20)
    The image is derived from legal practice about debts, but the precise application in
Colossians 2:14, partly occasioned by some grammatical difficulties in the text, is not
patently clear. Certainly there is no sure reference to (1) a pact or handwritten certificate of
indebtedness between Adam and the devil in which man commits himself to a life of sin
and death in exchange for benefits Satan gives him. Some of the church fathers took this
view, and it has been revived in modern times (cf. G. Megas, ―Das ceirovgraron Adams.
Ein Beitrag zu Kol 2:13–15‖, ZNW 27 [1928] 305–320, for evidence; on the history of the
exegesis of the passage see E. Best, A Historical Study of the Exegesis of Col 2, 14. Rome:
unpublished thesis, 1956).
(2) Another line of interpretation has been to regard the ceirovgrayon not as a document of
human guilt with regard to the Mosaic law but as an indictment presented at the heavenly
court. Bandstra (Law, 158–63) drew attention to a use of ceirovgrafon in an anonymous
Jewish apocalypse (ascribed to the first century B.C.) where the word designates the book
held by an accusing angel in which the seer‘s sins are recorded, and regarding which he
asked that they might be blotted out. Developing a suggestion of Blanchette (CBQ 23 [1961]
306–312), Bandstra agreed there was an early Jewish-Christian interpretation which
identified the ceirovgrafon with Christ himself. Accordingly, in Colossians 2:14 reference
is made to our body of flesh which Christ took on himself and in which our sins were
condemned (cf. 2 Cor 5:21; Gal 3:13; 4:4; Rom 8:3). He took this body on himself in order
to blot it out on the cross. Martin (Reconciliation, 1974, 121, 122) claims that additional
support for this interpretation comes from the Gospel of Truth (20:22–28) where reference
is made to Jesus taking or wearing a body as his own, and as being nailed to the cross
where he affixed the ordinance of the Father to that cross. Both Bandstra and Martin tie in
this interpretation with the unusual word ―divest‖ (ajpekduvomai, v 15; 3:9; cf. 2:11). In
―putting off‖ the body of flesh (2:11) Christ also divested himself of the principalities and
powers. The evil powers had attacked Christ since he had assumed in his body the
ceirovgrayon, the charge-list of guilt (Martin, Reconciliation, 1974, 122), and so they
accused him as though he was a sinner. However, he stripped off (ajpekdusavmeno", v 15)
their hold and overcame them.
    This ingenious interpretation, if correct, would solve some of the exegetical problems of
the passage. But certain difficulties remain: first, in the light of the widespread use of
ceirovgrafon as a certificate of indebtedness signed by men over against a single instance
of a heavenly book, doubt is raised about the application of the term to an angelic
indictment. Also ceirovgrafon becomes the heavenly charge-list, then the body of flesh
and finally Christ, or at least the body which Christ takes upon himself. The term is meant
to signify too many things at once.
(3) Our preference is to understand ceirovgrafon as the signed acknowledgment of our
indebtedness before God. Like an IOU it contained penalty clauses (see Job 5:3; Philem
19). The Jews had contracted to obey the law, and in their case the penalty for breach of
this contract meant death (Deut 27:14–26; 30:15–20). Paul assumes that the Gentiles were
committed, through their consciences, to a similar obligation, to the moral law in as much
as they understood it (cf. Rom 2:14, 15). Since the obligation had not been discharged by
either group the ―bond‖ remained against us (kauj hJmw`n).
    The term ―regulation‖ (dovgma) is employed in a variety of ways in the NT to denote a
―decree‖ of Caesar Augustus concerning the enrollment (Luke 2:1; cf. Acts 17:7), and the
―decisions‖ (plural dovgmata) of the Jerusalem council (Acts 16:4). At Ephesians 2:15 the
plural dovgmata denotes the individual statutes of the commandments of the Mosaic law (in
Hellenistic Judaism the commandments of God were called dovgmata: 3 Macc 1:3; 4 Macc
10:2, and for further references in Josephus and Philo cf. Kittel, TDNT 2, 230–32). Here the
term may be translated ―binding statutes‖ or ―legal demands‖ (regarding its relationship to
the cognate dogmativzesqe see on v 20). The dative case toi`" dovgmasin is probably: (a)
causal, ―because of the regulations,‖ so indicating why the bond or certificate of
indebtedness has a case against us (Lohse, 109, 110, Bacchiocchi, From Sabbath, 350, and
Schweizer, 116, as well as some earlier exegetes who supplied the participle ―written‖ to
complete the sense), rather than (b) one of obligation, i.e. the bond placed us under an
obligation to keep the regulations (J. A. T. Robinson, The Body. A Study in Pauline
Theology [SBT 5; London: SCM, 1952] 43; C. F. D. Moule, ―Death ‗to Sin,‘ ‗to Law,‘ and
‗to the World‘; a Note on certain Datives,‖ Mélanges Bibliques en hommage au R. P. Béda
Rigaux, ed. A. Descamps and A. de Halleux [Gembloux: Duculot, 1970] 371, 372; Caird,
195, who translates the clause: ―our undischarged commitment to the decrees of the law
…‖), or (c) a dative of accompaniment, ―the bond, decrees and all‖ (Bruce, 237; cf. Harris,
in NIDNTT 3, 1199). (Percy‘s view, Probleme, 88, 89, which connects the dative toi`"
dovgmasin with the following clause o{ h\n uJpenantivon hJmi`n, so that the meaning is ―the
handwriting that was against, which by virtue of the ordinances [i.e. the law of Moses]
testified against us,‖ states the reason why the ―bond‖ could make its enmity against us
effective; this suggestion has the merit of dealing with the apparently superfluous words
―which was against us,‖ but is rather awkward to construe in spite of the parallels he
presents.)
    The words ―which was against us‖ (o{ h\n ujpenantivon hJmi`n) need not be regarded as an
awkward addition (by the author of Colossians [so Lohse, 109] or by Paul [Martin,
Reconciliation, 1974, 121]) to an already existing original text. The earlier phrase ―against
us‖ (kaqÆ hJmw`n) ―emphasizes the brute fact of indebtedness, while the latter uJpenantivon
hJmi`n stresses the active hostility produced by this fact‖ (Harris, NIDNT T 3, 1199). Such a
distinction gains support from the meaning of uJpenantivo" (―opposed,‖ ―contrary,‖
―hostile,‖ BAG, 838) for in the LXX it occurs often as a designation for enemies (Gen 22:17;
24:60; Exod 1:10; 15:7; 23:27, etc; cf. Lohmeyer, 118, who is followed by Lohse, 110).
ejxaleivya" … kaiv aujto; h\rken ejk tou` mevsou proshlwvsa" aujto; tw`/ staurw`/. God has
not only forgiven us all our sins but he also utterly removed the signed acknowledgment of
our indebtedness. The removal of the debt is signified by h\rken ejk mevsou and this is
further elaborated in two figures: (a) he blotted it out, and (b) he nailed it to the cross (A.
Deissmann, Paul. A Study in Social and Religious History. Tr W. E. Wilson. 2nd ed.
[London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1926], 172, considered that the papyrus debt-records
illustrate the popular appeal of this double metaphor; the bond is first blotted out and then
canceled).
    ai[rw (―lift up‖, ―pick up‖) can be used of removal by force, even by killing (BA G, 24).
Here the expression (ai[rw ejk mevsou) which was common in Greek (1 Cor 5:2; for
extrabiblical instances, cf. BAG, 24, and Lohse, 110) signifies the decisive removal of the
―certificate of indebtedness‖ (the change from the aorist tense to the perfect points to the
permanence of the removal). This taking away was effected through blotting it out
(ejxaleivya"; cf. Jeremias, TDNT 1, 185, 186). ejxaleivyw means to ―rub out,‖ ―wipe away‖
and so obliterate from sight, as writing on wax or other written records were removed (at
Acts 3:19 it is used of blotting out sins, in Rev 3:5 of a name from the Book of Life). God
has wiped the slate clean and given a fresh start. An OT antecedent is Isaiah 43:25 (LXX): ―I
am the one who wipes out (ejxaleivfwn) your iniquities and I will not remember them‖ (cf.
LXX Ps 50:1; Jer 18:23, etc).
That ―certificate of indebtedness‖ was removed when God nailed it to the cross
(proshlwvsa" aujto; tw`/ staurw`/). A. Deissmann (Light from the Ancient East. Tr L. R. M.
Strachan [New York: Doran, 1927] 332, 323. Reprinted [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1978])
considered the verb ―nailed‖ referred to a common custom of cancelling a bond or other
agreement by crossing it out with the Greek cross-letter X. But there is no mention here of
crossing out the ―bond‖; the Greek word for this action is ciavzw, and the word staurov"
does not suggest the X shape (cf. Bruce, 238), while ―there seems to be no evidence for the
alleged custom of cancelling a bond by piercing it with a nail‖ (Moule, 99). The
metaphorical language is not to be pressed. God has canceled the bond by nailing it to the
cross—this is a vivid way of saying that because Christ was nailed to the cross our debt has
been completely forgiven. (There may also be an allusion to the custom of affixing to the
cross the ―inscription‖ [ejpigrafhv] bearing the crime of the evildoer, Mark 15:26. God
nails the accusation against us to the cross of Jesus, just as his accusation had been nailed
there.)
    15. ajpekdusavmeno" ta;" ajrca;" kai; ta;" ejxousiva" ktl. If verses 13 and 14 speak in
graphic terms about the forgiveness of sins and the removal of our signed acknowledgment
of indebtedness, then verse 15 refers to God stripping the principalities and powers, ―whose
possession of the damning indictment kept us in their grip‖ (Bruce, 239), of their authority
and dignity.
In the early church and among many recent commentators it was thought that Christ rather
than God is the subject of the sentence (for earlier references see Lightfoot, 187–89, and
more recently Bruce, 238, 239, rather cautiously Martin, NCB, 86, 87, and Hanson, Studies,
8–10, etc). For this to be correct there must have been a change of subject in the middle of
the sentence (Hanson sees the transition occurring at ejxaleivfa"; Lightfoot postpones it till
h\rken) since in verse 13 God is explicitly the one who gave life to the Colossians with
Christ. Nevertheless this interpretation has the merit of retaining the same meaning for the
key term ajpekduvomai (―put off‖) in Colossians 2 and 3 (cf. 3:9 and ajpevkdusi" at 2:11) as
Beasley-Murray (Baptism, 161) concedes.
     At chapter 3:9 the middle voice of this verb (ajpekdusavmenoi) denotes ―putting off,‖ as
of clothes. The Greek fathers thought that at chapter 2:15 Christ divested himself of the
principalities and powers. These hostile forces had clung to him on the cross like an alien
garment (Lightfoot, 188, who agreed with this general view of the Greek fathers
commented: ―The powers of evil, which had clung like a Nessus robe about his humanity,
were torn off and cast aside for ever‖). The Latin fathers in to the question, ―What response
did Christ strip himself of?‖ answered: ―the flesh‖ (cf. v 11, ―in the putting off of the body
of flesh‖), since the flesh was the means by which the evil powers could exercise their
tyranny over man (cf. Robinson, Body, 41: ―The dying Jesus, like a king, divests Himself of
that flesh, the tool and medium of their power, and thereby exposes them to ridicule for
their Pyrrhic victory.‖ On this view ―principalities and powers‖ is governed by ―displayed‖
but not by ―stripped off‖). Scott (Christianity according to St Paul [Cambridge: University
Press, 1927] 34–36) combined these two early interpretations understanding that Christ
stripped off from himself the evil forces which attacked him and that he did so by divesting
his flesh, since it was the latter, his frail humanity, which the evil powers assaulted. But
Colossians 2:15 does not hint at the suggestion that Christ was clothed with the
―principalities and powers,‖ nor is it to be inferred that these beings are identical with the
―body of flesh.‖
In NT Greek there was a tendency to substitute the middle voice for the active in certain
verbs (BDF, para. 316 (1) list ajpekduvomai as one example of this tendency; cf. Robertson,
Grammar, 804, 805). Perhaps, therefore, the best way to resolve the exegetical difficulty is
to regard ajpekdusavmeno" as a middle voice with an active sense (=―strip‖), so indicating
that God stripped the principalities and powers, utterly divesting them of their dignity and
might (Lohmeyer, 119, argued that the imagery was not drawn from the battlefield where
an army is ―disarmed‖ [RSV, cf. Oepke, TDNT 2, 319, and BAG, 83] but from a royal court in
which public officials are degraded by being stripped of their dignity; cf. Martin, NCB, 87,
Schlier, TDNT 2, 31, and Lohse, 112. However true this may be, the context of Colossians
2:15 demands that we understand the removal of power or authority which the principalities
exercised over the lives of men by holding the certificate of indebtedness in their grip).
     This interpretation retains the same subject throughout (it must be pointed out,
however, that many who consider Christ is the subject of the action of divesting remind us
that such a transition is possible for Paul since it was God in Christ who was at work in the
redemptive events; we ought not to separate the action of the Father from that of the Son:
so Bruce, 239, E. Larsson, Christus als Vorbild. Eine Untersuchung zu den paulinischen
Tauf- und Eikon- texten [ASNU 23; Uppsala: Gleerup, 1962] 85, Hanson, Studies, 10, 11),
while allowing the final words of the paragraph ejn aujtw`/ to be rendered ―in him,‖ rather
than ―in it (i.e. the cross),‖ so being consistent with the earlier references in the section,
verses 6–12, where the words ―in him‖ and ―in whom‖ sound like a refrain.
ejdeigmavtisen ejn parrhsiva/. Having divested the principalities and powers of their
dignity and authority on the cross, God exposed to the universe their utter helplessness.
deigmativzw occurs on only one other occasion in the Greek Bible, at Matthew 1:19, where
it is found with reference to Joseph not wishing to cite Mary publicly and thus expose her
(cf. BAG, 172; Schlier, TDNT 2, 31; on the possible OT background to the verb in this
passage see Hanson, Studies, 1–12). Here the term means not to ―make an example‖ of
them (which would be paradeigmativzw), but to ―show them in their true character.‖ By
putting them on public display God exposed the principalities and powers to ridicule (cf.
Meyer, 383). This open manifestation of their being divested of dignity and authority only
serves to demonstrate more clearly the infinite superiority of Christ (so Schlier, TDNT 5,
883, 884, with reference to the significance of ejn parrhsiva/; cf. Lohse, 112).
    qriambeuvsa" aujtou;" ejn aujtw`/. The word qriambeuvw occurs only here and at 2
Corinthians 2:14 in the NT. The image behind this verb is that of a tumultuous procession
through the streets of Rome to celebrate a military victory (note Williamson‘s careful
examination of the texts, Int 22 [1968] 317–32; and for a colorful account of a triumph see
his lengthy quotation of Plutarch‘s Aemilius Paulus, 32–34, on pp. 322, 323). The term
ought to be translated: (1) to ―enjoy a triumphal procession‖ or ―celebrate a victory‖ (as
distinct from ―triumphing‖ or ―triumphing over,‖ for these terms convey the idea of
winning a victory, while the texts point to a Roman celebration, not the victory itself), when
qriambeuvw is used absolutely or followed by a prepositional phrase; or (2) to ―lead as a
conquered enemy in a victory parade,‖ when followed by a direct personal object (as at 2
Cor 2:14 and Col 2:15). (Recently R. B. Egan, ―Lexical Evidence on Two Pauline
Passages,‖ NovT 19 [1977] 34–62, argued at some length that the meaning ―reveal‖ yields
good sense in both Pauline instances of the verb qriambeuvw; in our judgment, however, the
case is not proven: first, it is doubtful whether this meaning of the term was sufficiently
early and widespread for Paul to have used it in this way and for his two groups of readers
at Corinth and Colossae to be in no doubt about its meaning. Further, the meaning ―reveal‖
does not fit the Colossians context as well as the other rendering.)
    At 2 Corinthians 2:14 Paul is a prisoner in a triumphal procession. He is a slave in the
triumph but paradoxically as a privileged captive, as a ―slave of Christ.‖ There is no extant
evidence to suggest that the expression could apply to a victorious soldier or subordinate
officer in a triumphal procession (cf. Williamson, Int 22 [1968] 325, 326, and Delling,
TDNT 3, 160). In the Colossians reference, however, the victims are true enemies. The
―principalities and powers‖ who have been conquered and are drawn along in God‘s
triumphal procession are not related to God or Christ as Paul and other Christians are. God
parades these powerless ―powers‖ and ―principalities‖ to make plain to all the magnitude of
the victory (Lohse, 112). Their period of rule is finished; they must worship and serve the
victor. These authorities are not depicted as gladly surrendering but as submitting against
their wills to a power they cannot resist. They have been pacified (1:20), overcome and
reconciled, yet not finally destroyed or appeased. They continue to exist, opposed to man
and his interests (Rom 8:38, 39). But they cannot finally harm the person who is in Christ,
and their ultimate overthrow, although in the future, is sure and certain (1 Cor 15:24–28).

A Note on the ―Elements of the Universe‖ (stoicei`a tou` kovsmou)
    The phrase the ―elements of the world‖ (stoicei`a tou` kovsmou) appears three times in
Paul‘s letters (Col 2:8, 20; Gal 4:3; at v 9 the parallel expression ta; ajsqenh` kai; ptwcaj
stoicei`a, ―the weak and beggarly elements,‖ is used) and while it is of considerable
importance for an understanding of the heresy propounded by the false teachers at
Colossae, and the apostle‘s answer to that false teaching, its meaning has been disputed
since earliest times as Bandstra has shown in his history of the exegesis of these passages
(Law, 5–30, especially 5–12).
    The noun stoicei`on, which was probably derived from stoi`co" (originally a military
term meaning a ―row‖), had the connotation a ―member of a row or series.‖ The earliest
known reference was to a ―shadow‖ by which time was reckoned (fifth-fourth cent. B.C.,
Aristophanes in Ecclesiazusae, 651, cited by Bandstra, Law, 31). stoicei`on was
essentially a ―formal‖ word, similar to the English word ―element‖ and capable of taking on
new sets of meanings when applied to different contexts. So in Aristotle it connoted
―letters‖ or ―phonemes‖ of language, ―notes‖ in a musical scale, ―elementary principles‖ or
―rules‖ in politics, geometrical and mathematical ―propositions‖ basic to the proof of other
propositions, and so on.
―Element‖ was a common word in the language of the philosophers particularly when they
spoke of the matter or the elements out of which everything was formed. So Plato referred
to the ―primary elements (stoicei`a) of which we and all else are composed‖ (Theaet
201e). Zeno defined an element as ―that from which particular things first come to be at
their birth and into which they are finally resolved.‖ ―Earth‖ (u{lh), ―fire‖ (pu`r), ―water‖
(u{dwr), and ―air‖ (ajhvr) are then mentioned as the four elements which constitute
everything (Diogenes Laertius 7:136, 137). This meaning of ―element‖ was widely known
in the Hellenistic philosophical schools and was current in Hellenistic Judaism (4 Macc
12:13; Wisd 7:17; 19:18, etc cf. Lohse, 97, for references), though as one might expect in
the latter it was given a distinctive theological twist: PhiloDeCher 127, ―the four elements‖
(ta; tevssara stoicei`a) are the ―material‖ (u{lh) from which God fashioned the universe.
    At this point it is necessary to note that during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
scholars, in seeking to understand Paul‘s use of this phrase ―the elements of the world‖ (ta;
stoicei`a tou` kovsmou) in Galatians and Colossians, have presented three major lines of
interpretation as they have borne in mind that: (a) the meaning of stoicei`on varies
considerably according to its contexts (much the same as the English word ―element‖); (b)
Paul uses the phrase in polemical contests; (c) the errors combated in Galatians and
Colossians while containing some similarities (references to Jewish regulations, and a
relapse from the freedom of Christianity into some dogmatic system) are different at
significantpoints; and (d) in Galatians 4 both Jews and Gentiles outside of Christ are under
the ―elements‖ (vv 3, 9). With individual variations the following are the main lines (cf.
Bandstra, Law, 15–30):
    (1) The first approach takes its cue from stoicei`on as an ―element‖ or ―principle‖ and
understands the phrase in question as the ―principles of religious teaching or instruction,‖
which are usually associated with the immaturity of humanity prior to Christ. The main
differences in this general approach are whether stoicei`a points to the Jewish law alone
(so de Wette), or to principles common to both Jewish and Gentile religion (Meyer, B.
Weiss, Lightfoot), and whether kovsmo" (―world‖) denotes the whole of humanity outside
of Christ or the external material world.
    Among twentieth century exponents of this view Ewald drew attention to the
extra-Christian world‘s deficiency in knowledge, stoicei`a denoted the ―elements of
knowledge‖ which represented the age of minority. Burton, after a lengthy note in his
commentary on Galatians, concluded the phrase meant ―the rudimentary religious teachings
possessed by the (human) race,‖ a view similar to that of Strack-Billerbeck. Moule
admitted that in this context of Colossians although belief in demonic powers was present,
because of the absence of evidence outside the NT for this meaning of the term stoicei`a
until later times, he preferred the rendering ―elementary teaching‖—that teaching by
Judaistic or pagan ritualists, ―a ‗materialistic‘ teaching bound up with ‗this world‘ alone,
and contrary to the freedom of the Spirit‖ (Moule, 92; cf. BAG, 768, 769, which lists
―fundamental principles‖ as a possible meaning of the phrase in both Galatians and
Colossians).
Bandstra‘s own view which falls within this general approach begins with the meaning of
stoicei`on as ―inherent component.‖ Inextricably bound up with this is the notion of
―power‖ or ―force.‖ The term kovsmo" is not understood in the sense of ―universe‖ (as most
moderns take it here) but denotes ―that whole sphere of human activity which stands over
against Christ and His salvation, not considered first of all as inherently and structurally
evil, but … which is ineffectual for overcoming sin and … for bringing salvation‖ (Law,
57). The stoicei`a are the basic components of this area of activity—they are, Bandstra
concludes after an exegetical examination of Galatians 4 and Colossians 2, the law and the
flesh. These were the ―two fundamental cosmical forces‖ which held Jews and Gentiles
alike in bondage and from which men and women needed to be freed by Christ‘s death.
Some of the phrases in the Colossians paragraph seem to have been chosen to cover both
Jewish and pagan items: so ―tradition of men‖ is ―not necessarily to be limited to [the]
Jewish tradition of the fathers, but could include all sorts of tradition common to mankind‖
(Law, 70), while ―philosophy‖ probably includes a reference to the Mosaic law but is
broader than this.
    Bandstra‘s approach, which interprets the stoicei`a as the ―law‖ and the ―flesh‖
(unregenerate human nature), two elemental forces in the world operating before Christ and
apart from him, could be seen as being in line with Paul‘s general teaching. However,
several comments may be made: (a) his case has been worked out with special reference to
Galatians and has not paid sufficient attention to the distinctive features in Colossians. (b) It
is hardly correct to speak of the ―law‖ and the ―flesh‖ as the basic structural entities outside
of Christ. (c) The real weakness of this approach which interprets stoicei`a as ―elements‖
in the sense of ―principles‖ is that Paul speaks of them in a rather personal fashion (at Gal
4:3, 9 they seem to be conceived of as angelic powers), and in contexts where other
personal beings or forces are referred to (at Col 2:10, 15, demonic principalities desire to
exercise their tyranny over men). (d) Finally, this line does not pay sufficient attention
successively to the developing evidence (admittedly some is second century A.D. material)
from Jewish sources indicating a belief in angels governing and being active in the forces
of nature, the other evidence to show that similar ideas were present in contemporary pagan
and syncretistic religions, and the importance of the spirit world in NT thought generally.
    (2) A second interpretation has been called the ―cosmological‖ view. The term kovsmo"
(―world‖) in the phrase ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou was understood to refer to the material,
visible world while stoicei`a denoted the elemental parts of that world. Zahn, for example,
argued that Paul understood by the expression ―nothing but the kovsmo" itself, and this as
composed of manifold material elements‖ while Kögel considered that being bound to
material things was the point of comparison between the observance of the Jewish law and
the practices of pagan religions.
Recently Schweizer (Jews, Greeks and Christians, 249–55; cf. his commentary, 100–107)
has argued that since all the parallels to the phrase ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou (―the
elements of the universe‖) outside the NT do not designate anything other than the elements
earth, water, air and fire (cf. Blinzler, Studiorum, 438–41) it is difficult to understand it
differently in Colossians 2:8 and 20. A connection between the term ―elements‖ and stars
or their deities, spirits or demons cannot be found before the second century A.D. Philo
proves that his readers were expected to understand the term in its normal physical
understanding without any overtones pointing to their demonic character (Her 140; Abr
162, etc), while the total absence of the phrase in all the Pauline (or post-Pauline) lists of
powers, thrones, authorities, principalities, dominions, and so on argues, according to
Schweizer, in this same direction. The phrase would be expected at Colossians 1:16; 2:10
or 2:15 if it denoted demons. Schweizer further suggested that the Colossian ―philosophy‖
had been influenced by Pythagorean ideas in which cosmic speculation had already been
ethicized (see the introduction on the nature of the Colossian philosophy). The elements
exercise power in much the same way that the law does (note the points of contact with
Bandstra‘s view above). Because the impure soul cannot ascend to the highest divine
element it would be driven back to the lower elements, to the air, the sea, and the earth. So,
purification of the soul by abstinence from meat, and so on, was a matter of life and death,
and became a kind of slavery to innumerable legalistic demands.
     (3) The majority of commentators this century have understood the ―elements of the
world‖ in Galatians and Colossians as denoting spiritual beings, regarded as personal and
active in the physical and heavenly elements. From early times the stars and powers
thought to control the universe were worshiped and given offerings. Later in the Hellenistic
period this homage was justified by pointing out that man was fashioned from the same
elements of the cosmos.
     The term stoicei`a was applied, as we have seen, to the physical components of the
universe—earth, fire, water and air (PhiloQuis 134; cf. 2 Pet 3:10, 12). In Hellenistic
syncretism the teaching about the elements was ―mythologized‖ so that they were thought
to be under the control of spirit powers. Along with the stars and heavenly bodies these
were described as personal beings believed to control man‘s destiny. At a later time the
Testament of Solomon can describe the ―elements‖ as the ―cosmic rulers of darkness‖ (8:2),
while the stars whose constellations controlled the universe and in particular man‘s fate
were also styled ―elements‖ (stoicei`a; Ps-Calisthenes 1, 12, 1). Men must not only
possess knowledge about these elements but also reverence these principalities and powers
submitting to the rules and regulations imposed on one‘s life. (Because of contextual
considerations in Col 2, Lohse, 99, and others have argued that too much weight should not
be placed on the lack of explicit usage of ta; stoicei`a as ―elemental spirits‖ in the
pre-Pauline writings.)
     Although in Judaism worship was offered to the one true God, increasing prominence
was given to angels. Jewish apocalyptic literature had already associated angels closely
with the heavenly powers. According to Jubilees 2:2 each of the elements had its own angel
to rule over it, while in 1 Enoch 60:11, 12 reference is made to the spirits of the various
natural elements (cf. 1 Enoch 43:1, 2; 80:6; 2 Enoch 4:1, 2, etc). Three times in the NT (Acts
7:53; Gal 3:19 and Heb 2:2) the Jewish tradition regarding the angelic mediation of the law
(absent from the Pentateuchal account of the law-giving) is mentioned, and in Galatians 4:3
some close connection between (or identification of) these angels and the stoicei`a is
required.
It is probable that in the syncretistic teaching being advocated at Colossae these stoicei`a
were grouped with the angels and seen as controlling the heavenly realm and man‘s access
to God‘s presence. One way they could be placated was by rigorously subduing the flesh so
as to gain visionary experiences of the heavenly dimension and to participate in their
angelic liturgy (see the discussion on 2:18). By this the devotees gained fullness of
salvation, reached the divine presence and attained the esoteric knowledge which
accompanied such visions. Christ had in effect become just another intermediary between
God and man.

Explanation (2:8–15)
    After admonishing the readers to continue in the teaching they had received when they
accepted ―Christ Jesus the Lord‖ as their ―tradition‖ and to remain immovable in their faith
(vv 6 and 7), Paul confronts the community with the first of several warnings: they are to be
on guard lest they be carried away from the truth into the slavery of error. The means these
spiritual confidence tricksters would use to ensnare the community was their particular
―philosophy‖ (v 8) that was seductive and misleading. It gave all the appearance of having
authority, dignity and revelation on its side, but was really a tool in the hands of the
principalities and powers (vv 10, 15), those demonic personal forces which sought to
tyrannize over the lives of men. Worst of all it stood diametrically opposed to Christ.
    Taking up language from the hymn of chapter 1:15–20 the apostle spells out why (v 9)
the philosophy of the false teachers is not according to Christ. Two reasons are given: first,
this Christ is the one in whom the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Only in
him is fullness to be found. It is not to be attained by groveling before the elements of the
universe or by observing their regulations. Second, the readers have already been ―filled‖
in Christ, the same person in whom the fullness of Deity dwells and the One who is ruler
and master over every principality and power.
    Paul elaborates on the theme of the Colossians‘ being filled in Christ by describing their
participation in his death, burial and resurrection with a series of past tenses: you were
circumcised in his circumcision, i.e. you died in his death, you were buried with him in
baptism and you were raised with him in his resurrection. The apostolic message, as
evidenced in 1 Corinthians 15:3–5, spoke of Christ‘s death, burial and resurrection; here the
same elements are spelled out with reference to the Colossians‘ incorporation into those
salvation history events. The resurrection of the Colossians with Christ has already taken
place. The suggestion of the false teachers was probably that the believers were not
complete in Christ. They needed to follow a strict discipline of ritual and ascetic
observance, as well as taking sufficient account of the spiritual powers if they were to
proceed along the path to ―fullness of life.‖ Against this the apostle asserts that the
believers of this congregation in the Lycus valley had already been raised with Christ.
    Those who had once been spiritually dead in their trespasses and sinful nature God had
made alive. The Colossians had come to life with Christ who was dead and rose again.
Their new life, then, was a sharing in the life which he received when he rose from the
dead. God had forgiven them as Gentiles, along with Paul and other Jewish Christians, all
their trespasses. Indeed, he had not only canceled the debt but also destroyed the document
on which it was recorded. This he did by blotting out the bond with its damning indictment
against us and nailing it to the cross when Christ died. Further, he stripped the principalities
and powers, who had kept us in their grip through their possession of this document,
divesting them of their dignity and might. God exposed to the universe their utter
helplessness leading them in Christ in his triumphal procession. He paraded these
powerless ―powers and principalities‖ so that all the world might see the magnitude of his
victory.
But these spiritual powers had not been annihilated. In that triumphal procession they were
visible. They continue to exist, inimical to man and his interests (Rom 8:38, 39).
Nevertheless they are powerless figures unable to harm the Christian who lives under the
lordship of Christ. How foolish is it then for the Colossians to think, as the false teachers
want them to, that they needed to grovel before these weak and beggarly elements as
though they controlled the lines of communication between God and man.
     Christ is the one whom they received as Lord. Let them continue to live in him, for he
is the one in whom the entire fullness of Godhead dwells, the one in whom they have been
made full, the person in whom they have been incorporated in death, burial and
resurrection. It is in him that they have been raised and given new life. What really matters
then is Christ and Christ alone.




Freedom from Legalism (2:16–23)
Bibliography
Bandstra, A. J. Dimensions, 329–43. Law. ———. Beasley-Murray, G. R. RevExp 70 (1973)
469–79. Bornkamm, G. Conflict, 123–45. Carr, W. JTS 24 (1973) 492–500. Dibelius, M. Conflict,
61–121. Francis, F. O. Conflict, 163–207. Hanssler, B. ―Zu Satzkonstruktion und Aussage in Kol
2, 23.‖ Wort Gottes in der Zeit. Festschrift für Karl Hermann Schelkle zum 65. Geburtstag, ed. H.
Feld and J. Nolte. Düsseldorf: Patmos, 1973, 143–48. Hollenbach, B. ―Col. ii. 23: Which Things
lead to the Fulfilment of the Flesh.‖ NTS 25 (1978–79) 254–61. Hooker, M. D. Christ, 315–31.
Kehl, N. ―Erniedrigung und Erhöhung in Qumran und Kolossä. ZKT 91 (1969) 364–94.
Lähnemann, J. Kolosserbrief, 125–49. Reicke, B. ―Zum sprachlichen Verständnis vom Kol. 2, 23.
ST 6 (1952) 39–53. Schweizer, E. Beiträge, 147– 63. ———. ThBer 5 (1976) 163–91. Zeilinger, F.
Der Erstgeborene, 56–60, 125–34.

Translation
16
  Therefore, do not let anyone pass judgment on you with regard to food and drink or
concerning a religious festival, a new moon celebration or a sabbath day. 17These are a
shadow of the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in Christ. 18Let no
one condemn you, delighting in humility and the angelic worship [of God], whicha he has
seen upon entering. He is puffed up with idle notions from his unspiritual mind, 19and he
does not hold fast to the head, from whom the whole body, nourished and held together by
its joints and ligaments, grows with a growth that is from God. 20Since you died with Christ
from the control of the elemental spirits of the world, how can you, as if you still lived in a
worldly way, voluntarily place yourselves under the regulations:21 ―Do not handle! Do not
taste! Do not even touch!‖?22 These are all destined to perish with use, for they are based
on human commands and teachings.23 Such regulations actually lead—though having a
reputation for wisdom in the spheres of voluntary worship, humility andb severe treatment
of the body, without any value whatsoever—to the gratification of the flesh.

Notes
   a. The reading a{ (―which‖) is strongly supported by P46 and good representatives of the
Alexandrian and Western types of text (a
    * A B D*
               etc). On the insertion of the negative ―not‖ (oujk or mhv) due to a failure to
understand Paul‘s idiom, and on the number of conjectural emendations see the exegetical
comment below.
b. The kaiv (―and‖) was omitted by P46 B 1739 Origenlat and other Fathers, and this is strong
and early external evidence. Accordingly ajfeidiva/ swvmato" is not the third in a series of
datives after ejn (―in‖) but is an instrumental dative (―by severe treatment of the body‖)
qualifying the previous prepositional phrase. On the other hand, the omission may have
been accidental since it is found in a
 A C Dgr H
           33 81, etc

Form/Structure/Setting
    This lengthy and involved section, which follows hard upon the positive exposition of
God‘s work in Christ and the Colossians‘ union with him in his death, burial and
resurrection, springs out of (ou\n, ―therefore‖) what has preceded (see Lohmeyer, 96, and
Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 136) The short warning about the ―philosophy‖ in verse 8 is
developed in the further injunctions of this paragraph. There are formal analogies between
the expression mh; ou\n ti" uJma`" (―Therefore do not … anyone … you‖) and the opening
words of verse 8, blevpete mhv ti" uJma`" (―See to it that no one … you‖), while verse 18
continues with a similar introductory formula, mhdei;" uJma`" … (―let no one [condemn]
you‖).
    The first sentence (vv 16, 17) opens with a warning mh; ou\n ti" uJma`" krinevtw
(―Therefore do not let anyone pass judgment upon you‖). Five areas covered by the
prohibition are then enumerated and the first three of them are introduced by the
preposition ejn (―in,‖ that is, ―with reference to‖):


ejn brwjsei kai; ejn povsei,

h[ ejn mejrei eJorth`" h[ neomhniva" h[ sabbavtwn.

―with regard to food or drink,

or concerning a religious festival, a new moon celebration

or a sabbath day.‖

    Verse 17, which spells out the reason for Paul‘s attack is constructed as a sharp
antithesis. The first clause is the criticism, the second the Christological contrast:


a{ ejstin skia; tw`n mellovntwn,
to; de; sw`ma tou` Cristou`.

―These are a shadow of the things that were to come;

the reality, however, is found in Christ‖ (NIV).

In verse 18 with a similar introductory formula to that of verse 16 the apostle refutes one of
the claims of the false teachers voiced in the Colossian community: mhdei;" uJma`"
katabrabeuevtw (―let no one condemn you‖). The words which immediately follow, qevlwn
ejn tapeinofrosuvnh/ … ejmbateuvwn (―delighting in humility … entering‖), which are
attached grammatically to katabrabeue;tw (―let [no one] condemn‖) are best understood
as quotations from catchwords of the ―philosophy‖ (see the relevant comment) and indicate
the basis of the opponents‘ haughty manner. The two participial clauses which follow, eijkh`/
fusiouvmeno" … (―puffed up without reason …‖ v 18) and ouj kratw`n th;n kefalhvn …
(―not holding fast to the head,‖ v 19) are Paul‘s severe criticisms of the false teachers. The
remainder of verse 19 is a relative clause (ejx ou\ …, ―from whom‖) dependent on kefalhv
(―head‖) which speaks of the growth of the whole body. By means of two prepositions ejk
(―from‖) and diav (―through‖) both the source of the sustenance by which the body lives and
the channels through which the nourishment comes are m
    In the strongly polemical section of verses 20–23 the apostle begins with a conditional
clause to remind his readers that they were united with Christ in his death (cf. v 11), and to
show that this death severed the bond which bound them to the ―elemental spirits of the
world‖: eij ajpeqavnete su;n Cristw`/ ajpo; tw`n stoiceivwn tou` kovsmou (the introductory eij
does not express doubt but means ―if as is the case,‖ ―since‖; cf. 3:3). The second half of
the sentence, in which the application is made, consists of a rhetorical question and a
rebuke: tiv wJ" zw`nte" ejn kovsmw/ dogmativzesqe; (―How then can you conduct your lives
as if you still lived in a worldly way?‖).
Three negative regulations, examples of the kinds imposed by the principalties and powers,
are then quoted by Paul as he ridicules his opponents with biting irony: mh; a{yh/ mhde;
geuvsh/ mhde; qivgh/" (―Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not even touch!‖ v 21). By means of
two relative clauses several criticisms of these kinds of regulations are made: a{ ejstin
pavnta eij" fqora;n th`/ ajpocrhvsei, … (v 22, ―all of which are destined to perish through
use …‖), and a{tinav ejstin … pro;" plhsmonh;n th`" sarkov" (v 23, ―which things
[actually] lead to the gratification of the flesh‖). Strictly speaking the first clause with its
relative a{ ―which‖) makes an objective statement about the regulations, while the second
with its relative of quality a{tina (―which sort of things‖) characterizes and condemns the
precepts of verse 21 and others like them. The prepositional phrase within the first clause
(which echoes the wording of Isaiah 29:13 LXX), kata; ta; ejntavlmata kai; didaskaliva"
tw`n ajnqrwvpwn (―according to the regulations: and doctrines of men‖) points out that these
taboos are merely human inventions. Within the second relative clause a lengthy
parenthesis is found (for a detailed justification of this see the comment on lovgon me;n
e[conta sofiva" ejn ejqeloqrhskiva/ kaiv tapeinofrosuvnh/ kai; ajfeidiva` swvmato", oujk ejn
timh`/ tini) (―though having a reputation for wisdom in the spheres of voluntary worship,
humility and severe treatment of the body, without any value whatsoever‖). The parenthesis
consists of a concessive clause lovgon me;n e[conta ktl. (―though having a reputation …‖).
Prohibitions of the kind mentioned in verse 21 carry a reputation for wisdom in the spheres
mentioned (note the preposition ejn, ―in,‖ qualifies the three following nouns which are
linked by kaiv, ―and‖). The second clause within the parentheses is subordinate to the
concessive clause and is Paul‘s comment: oujk ejn timh`/ tini (―without any value
whatsoever‖).

Comment
Bad theology leads to bad practice. The false notions about the person and work of Christ,
which are corrected in the positive affirmations of chapter 2:8–15, have their inevitable
corollary in these unusual aberrations on the practical side (Martin, NCB, 89). Masson (130)
has aptly entitled this section ―A Defence of Christian Liberty,‖ for in it the apostle points
out that since God has divested the principalities and powers of their authority and dignity
in Christ (and Paul has already said that Christ is head over all of these principalities, 2:10)
then those who have been united in him are free from the constraints of the ―elemental
spirits of the universe.‖ The evil powers which are seen to be behind the false practices and
regulations (2:20) have been defeated and publicly disgraced in Christ. The Colossians are
not to be impressed by those who boast of their own experiences and arrogantly pass
disparaging judgments on the readers in connection with various ordinances.
     As many commentators have indicated our knowledge of the Colossian ―heresy,‖ which
at best is fragmentary and indirect, is derived mostly from this passage (see the fuller
discussion on the nature of the false teaching in the Introduction, xxx–xxxviii). The section
is written in a polemical style and filled with allusions to the teaching and catch-words of
the philosophy. However, some of the sentences are tightly constructed (cf. vv 18, 21 and
23) so that it is not always clear when the writer has taken words over from the opponents
and used them polemically, or when the phrases are his own formulation.
     16. mh; ou\n ti" uJma`" krinevtw. ―Therefore, do not let anyone pass judgment on you.‖
The ou\n (―therefore‖) links this passage with the preceding (cf. 2:6; 3:1). The evil powers
have been signally defeated in Christ (v 15). The Colossians are not to observe the
following customs and rituals as obligatory for this would be to acknowledge the
continuing authority of the powers through whom these regulations are mediated, the very
powers which had been overthrown. krivnw in this context is used of the judgment which
people customarily pass upon the lives and actions of their fellow men (BAG, 452), so trying
to influence them, and it means to ―take one to task‖ (Lightfoot, 191), ―pass judgment on‖
(Rom 2:1, 3; 14:3, 4, 10, 13; 1 Cor 10:29; etc). mhv ti" (as in v 8) rather than mhdeiv" (―no
one‖), may point to definite persons Paul has in mind (von Soden, 52, Abbott, 263). Also
the present imperative mh; … krinevtw (―do not … let judge‖) probably implies that this
sitting in judgment was already being done by some. But whoever it is that tries to act in
this way is behaving falsely.
     This taking the Colossians to task occurred in two main areas: (a) with respect to food:
ejn brwvsei kai; ejn povsei (―about what you eat or drink‖), and (b) regarding holy days: ejn
mevrei eJorth`" h[ neomhniva" h[ sabbavtwn (―with regard to a religious festival, a new moon
celebration or a sabbath day‖).
ejn brwvsei kai; ejn povsei (―about what you eat or drink‖; lit. ―with regard to food and
drink‖). Paul is probably not referring directly to the OT food laws since the Torah
contained no prohibitions respecting drinks, except in a few special cases (e.g. of priests
ministering in the tabernacle, Lev. 10:9; of liquids contained in unclean vessels, Lev 11:34,
36; and of Nazirite vows, Num 6:3; on brw`si", ―eating,‖ ―food,‖ see Behm, TDNT 1,
642–45, and on povsi", ―drinking,‖ ―drink,‖ note Goppelt, TDNT 6, 145–48). Nor is he
directing attention to abstentions similar to those enjoined in the apostolic letter of Acts
15:23–29 in which Gentiles without compromising their Christian liberty were to behave
considerately to their ―weaker brethren‖ of Jewish birth. Rather, these are more stringent
regulations of an ascetic nature apparently involving the renunciation of animal flesh and of
wine and strong drink, after a Nazirite fashion. They follow from the demand of ―severe
treatment of the body‖ (v 23), whereby abstinence from certain food is required (v 21; cf. 1
Tim 4:3).
     There are various reasons why abstinence from food and drink was practiced in the
ancient world: the belief in the transmigration of souls might prevent a person from eating
meat. Some practiced asceticism since it was bound up with their views of purity. Others
thought that by fasting one served the deity, came closer to him or prepared oneself for
receiving a divine revelation, a point that is important in the light of verse 18 (see Behm,
TDNT 4, 924–35, especially 926, where the relevant Hellenistic texts are noted). The
observance of taboos and sacred times in the Colossian ―philosophy‖ seems to have been
related to obedient submission to the ―elemental spirits of the universe‖ (cf. v 20).
     The apostle lays down the principle of Christian liberty: don‘t let anyone sit in
judgment on you. In writing to Corinth and Rome, where Christians had scruples about
food and drink as well as the observance of holy days, Paul introduces the further principle
which might impose a voluntary limitation on one‘s Christian liberty, i.e. ―the strong‖
should go out of their way to avoid offending the tender consciences of ―the weak‖ or
scrupulous (Rom 14:1–15:13; 1 Cor 8–10). But at Colossae the scrupulous were threatening
to impose their rigid principles on the rest of the congregation. Christian liberty needed to
be asserted in the light of false attempts to undermine it.
     ejn mevrei eJorth`" h[ sabbavtwn. The injunction continues: ―[don‘t let anyone take you
to task] with regard to a religious festival, a new moon celebration or a sabbath day.‖ The
Greek phrase ejn mevrei, denoting a category, comes to be used with a technical meaning ―in
the matter of,‖ ―with regard to‖ (cf. 2 Cor 3:10; 9:3, and note the extrabiblical examples
listed in BAG, 506), and it is followed by three nouns (in the genitive case). The terms
―festival‖ (eJorthv), ―new moon‖ (neomhniva) and ―sabbath‖ (savbbata) often occur in the
OT to describe special days dedicated to God (LXX Hos 2:13; Ezek 45:17; 1 Chr 23:31; 2
Chr 2:3; 31:3). For Israel the keeping of these holy days was evidence of obedience to
God‘s law and a sign of her election among the nations. At Colossae, however, the sacred
days were to be kept for the sake of the ―elemental spirits of the universe,‖ those astral
powers who directed the course of the stars and regulated the order of the calendar. So Paul
is not condemning the use of sacred days or seasons as such; it is the wrong motive
involved when the observance of these days is bound up with the recognition of the
elemental spirits.
     On the question as to what were the main influences on the Colossian ―philosophy,‖
Jewish or pagan, and the possible links between the false teaching and nonconformist
Judaism, as evidenced at Qumran, see the survey of scholarly opinion in the Introduction.
17. a{ ejstin skia; tw`n mellovntwn, to; de; sw`ma tou` Cristou`. ―These are a shadow of
the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in Christ‖ (NIV). The ground for
Paul‘s attack is now given (the clause is an epexegetical relative one, supplying the basis
for what has just been said; so rightly Meyer, 386). They must not be judged in these
matters because they all belonged to a transitory order.
     The contrast between outer appearance and the real substance was taught in Plato
(especially the famous image of the cave in his Republic, 514a–518b) and frequently taken
up in Hellenistic times. True being belongs to the realm of ideas and not to the shadows
which they cast in this world and which are perceived by our senses (cf. Lohse, 116). skiva
(―shadow‖) and eijkwvn (―form,‖ ―image‖) were the two terms most frequently used to
describe the contrast, though on occasion sw`ma (―body‖) was employed in place of eijkwvn
(―form,‖ ―image‖) for true reality as distinct from mere appearance (Lohse, 116; cf .
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 160, 161). (For examples see Philo, Conf. 190, DemigrAbr 12,
etc; cf. Schulz, TDNT 7, 394–97. In Josephus there is the oft-quoted example of Archelaus
appearing in Rome to petition the emperor for the shadow [skiva] of rule when he had
already appropriated the body [sw`ma], J. W. 2.28.)
There are, however, two significant differences between the Platonic and Philonic use of
this ―shadow/substance‖ contrast and that of Paul. The first difference is an eschatological
one. At Colossians 2:17 the first member of the contrast skiva (―shadow‖; not ―outline‖ or
―sketch‖ as some earlier commentators suggested, which would be skiagrafiva or
skiagravfmha) is qualified by tw`n mellovntwn (lit. ―of the coming things‖). The antithesis
is not set within the framework of a timeless metaphysical dimension but is understood as a
contrast between the two ages (Schulz, TDNT 7, 398; Schweizer, 120): ―shadow‖ is used not
so much in the Platonic sense of a copy of the heavenly and eternal ―idea‖ as in the sense of
a foreshadowing of what is to come. At Hebrews 10:1 the same point is made (by means of
the terms skiva, ―shadow‖ and eijkwvn, ―image‖) where the writer is thinking more especially
of the law concerning matters of priesthood and sacrifice in relation to the wilderness
tabernacle and the Jerusalem temple (on the differences between Philo and Hebrews
regarding time and eschatology see R. Williamson, Philo and the Epistle to the Hebrews
[ALGHJ 4; Leiden: Brill, 1970] 142–59). The expression ―the things to come‖ (ta;
mevllonta) does not refer to what lies in the future from the standpoint of the writer (as
Meyer, 387, argued), so pointing, for example, to the time of the Second Coming, for then
the skiva (―shadow‖) would not have been superseded and the ordinances referred to would
retain their importance. Rather, the expression is to be interpreted from the period when the
legal restrictions of verse 16 were enjoined; it is future from the standpoint of the OT (cf.
Williams, 105, Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 136, and Schweizer, 120). Christ has arrived.
The substance has already come. The regulations belonged to a transitory order, and have
lost all binding force. Hence the RSV translation ―a shadow of the things to come‖ is
ambiguous, if not misleading; better is the NIV rendering ―a shadow of the things that were
to come.‖
    The second difference is Christological: the ―substance belongs to Christ‖ (to; de; sw`ma
tou` Cristou`). sw`ma, perhaps of the body that casts a shadow, in contrast to skiva
(―shadow‖), comes to be used of ―the thing itself,‖ ―the reality‖ (BA G, 799), or ―the
substance.‖ This is not the sense in which the term is used elsewhere in the letter, and
attempts have been made to understand sw`ma tou` Cristou` here as the ―body of Christ.‖
Lohse (117) for example, argues that since sw`ma is employed rather than the more
frequently used alternative eijkwvn (―image‖) the author obviously wants to emphasize this
term ―body‖ once again. He adds: ―The reality which exists solely with Christ is shared
only by those who, as members of the body, adhere to the head (2:19).‖ This statement is
correct, but whether it springs out of the phrase in question or has to be read back into it is
the issue. Lohmeyer (123) went further than other commentators in seeing a reference to
the cosmic body of Christ but this is unlikely (see above 48–50). Benoit (RB 63 [1956] 12;
cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 161) claims that the term sw`ma is being used not simply to
signify ―substance.‖ Had Paul meant only this he would have written to; de; sw`ua oJ
Cristov" (―the substance is Christ‖—a nominative case; cf. Schweizer, 121, who thinks the
nominative was probably original, but there is no manuscript evidence to support this).
Instead, the present expression is elliptical and when written fully reads: to; de; sw`ma
ejstin to; sw`ma tou` Cristou` (―the substance is the body of Christ‖). According to Benoit
sw`ma thus has two meanings: (1) ―reality‖ as opposed to shadow, and (2) the resurrected
body of Christ, that is the church.
     Although many recent writers (cf. Moule, 103, Martin, NCB, 91, 92) have understood
sw`ma tou` Cristou` as denoting the body of Christ, one wonders whether the double
reference is necessary. On this view sw`ma requires to be understood as appearing twice, as
well as having two different meanings. But the sentence can be understood more simply by
referring it to the shadow/substance contrast alone (cf. Bruce, 245, who claims that the
attempts to interpret the phrase of the ―body of Christ‖ are unsatisfactory, while Best, Body,
121, asserts we must not fall into the error of assuming that ―every ime Paul uses this word
he gives to it its theological undertone—unless it cannot be explained without that
undertone‖).
     Christ and his new order are the perfect reality to which these earlier ordinances
pointed. These prescriptions of days gone by were but a shadow. They have lost any
binding force. Since the reality is here, the things of the shadow no longer constitute a norm
for judgment (Bandstra, Law, 92).
18. This verse has been described as one of the most contested passages in the NT,
presenting great difficulties in language and content (Percy, Probleme, 143). However, the
researches of Francis (Conflict; and subsequently Kehl, ZKT 91 [1969] 364–94, and
Bandstra, Dimensions, 329–43) have helped to throw light on the possible background to
the passage as well as the meaning of some of the more difficult terms in it. Although there
is still considerable difference of opinion about the details (note the Introduction,
xxxvi–xxxviii), the general drift of Paul‘s thought is reasonably clear. In our exegesis we
shall restrict our discussion to the more likely possibilities, and in particular attention will
be given to Francis‘ two articles: ―Humility and Angelic Worship in Col 2:18, ‖ ST 16
(1963) 109–34, Conflict, 163–195, and ―The Background of EMBATEUEIN (Col 2:18) in
Legal Papyri and Oracle Inscriptions,‖ Conflict, 197–207.
    mhdei;" uJma`" katabrabeuevtw. As in verse 16, though with different words, the
apostle refutes one of the claims the opponents made at Colossae: ―let no one condemn
you.‖ The main verb katabrabeuvw is rarely found in Greek literature (BAG, 409). It has
been thought here to retain the primary sense of the simple verb brabeuvw, to ―act as umpire
or one who gives the prize‖ (see Stauffer, TDNT 1, 637–39). The force of the word would
then be to ―deprive,‖ ―disqualify‖ or ―encroach upon another‘s interest.‖ However, it is
probably better, with many modem commentators, to understand it as meaning to
―condemn,‖ and so is equivalent to katakrivnw (cf. F. Field, cited by Pfitzner, Paul, 156).
    A series of dependent participial clauses follows: eijkh`/ fusiouvmeno" (―puffed up
without reason‖) and ouj kratw`n th;n kefalhvn … (―not holding fast to the head‖) are
Paul‘s negative evaluations of the false teachers. The words that immediately follow the
warning, qevlwn ejn tapeinofrosuvnh/ … ejmbateuvwn, indicate the basis for their position
and haughty manner. These phrases ―delighting in humility,‖ ―worship of angels,‖ and
―which he has seen upon entering‖ are therefore best understood as quotations from
catchwords of the ―philosophy‖ rather than Paul‘s critical or ironical remarks about their
behavior (cf. Lohse, 117, 118, Francis, Conflict, 167–85; against Percy, Probleme, 169,
who took the entire clause as a critical remark).
    qevlwn ejn. The expression is akin to the Hebrew , to ―delight in‖ (1 Sam 18:22;
2 Sam 15:26: 1 Kings 10:9; 1 Chr 28:4; Pss 111:1; 146:10) and so refers to those practices
in which the advocates of the philosophy took pleasure (cf. Lightfoot, 193, Moule, 104,
Schrenk, TDNT 3, 45, Percy, Probleme, 145–47; this seems more likely than the view that
qevlwn meaning ―willfully‖ is an adverbial absolute modifying katabrabeuevtw: ―let no one
willfully disqualify you,‖ so Dibelius-Greeven, 34, and A. Fridrichsen, ―QELWN Col 2:18,
‖ ZNW 21 [1922]135–37). Francis, Conflict, 167, renders the expression ―being bent upon‖
(RSV ―insisting on‖).
    ejn tapeinofrosuvnh/ kaiv qrhskeiva/ tw`n ajggevlwn: ―In humility and angelic worship
[of God].‖ (The two nouns tapeinofrosuvnh and qrhskeiva are joined by the one
preposition ejn and thus closely linked.) The Greek word tapeinofrosuvnh is normally
used in the NT in a good sense of the Christian grace of ―humility‖ (cf. 3:12; Phil 2:3; 1 Pet
5:5). Most exegetes have therefore thought that here a false humility is being spoken about
and have suggested that it is to be understood in the light of the following phrase, ―worship
of angels‖ (so Meyer, 393, Lightfoot, 194, Abbott, 268, and Scott 54). However, if the term
was employed by the opponents it must carry some sense such as ―mortification‖ or
―self-denial.‖ Can we be more specific than this? Lohse, 118, contends that the two
occurrences of the term (vv 18 and 23), both in the context of worship, point to the
eagerness and docility with which a person fulfills the cultic ordinances (=―readiness to
serve‖). He understands this not so much of a disposition as of cultic conduct.
Francis (Conflict, 167–71) has taken a different line. He has argued that the term was used
extensively in Jewish and Christian literature to denote fasting and other bodily rigors (note
in Col 2:16–23 the references to food and drink, and severity to the body, point to fasting).
These ascetic practices in Jewish mystical-pietistic literature were effectual for receiving
visions of the heavenly mysteries. Francis claims that though the technique of ―humility‖ (a
prerequisite for receiving visions) was widespread in the Hellenistic world,
tapeinofrosuvnh receives this application only in Jewish/Christian sources (notably
Hermas, Vis. 3, 10, 6; Sim. 5, 3, 7, Tertullian, Philo, Som. 1.33–37; Mos 2.67–70; QE 2.39;
1 and 2 Enoch, 4 Ezra, 2-3 Apoc. Bar., etc; for references see Conflict, 167–71). On
Francis‘ view, which seems likely (see Introduction, xxxvi–xxxviii), the apostle is stating
that the advocates of the Colossian ―philosophy‖ delighted in ascetic practices as a prelude
to the reception of heavenly visions.
    qrhskeiva/ tw`n ajggevlwn. The phrase has normally been taken (with the genitive being
regarded as objective) to denote ―the worship directed to the angels.‖ qrhskeiva (―worship‖;
cf. Acts 26:5; James 1:26, 27) can be used in either a positive or a negative way, depending
on the particular context (Schmidt, TDNT 3, 157, 158). This statement concerning
angel-worship seems to go beyond speculation about angels present in the Jewish schools
and denotes an actual cult of angels. The principalities and powers might have been in view
but Paul here refers to angels as a class (according to Bruce, 247, this is the natural
inference from the definite article ―the‖ before ―angels,‖ tw`n ajggevlwn). There is little
evidence for the worship of angels among the Jews (cf. A. L. Williams, ―The Cult of
Angels at Colossae, JTS 10 [1909] 413–38‖, Percy, Probleme, 149–55, and Carr, JTS 24
[1973] 496–500), and so it is argued that the expression is evidence of the syncretistic
character of the ―philosophy‖ at Colossae. It was Jewish mixed with pagan elements. The
angels determined the course of the cosmos and with it man‘s circumstances. Men
submitted to the angels in the cult by performing the prescribed acts and by fulfilling the
regulations laid down (so Lohse, 118, representing the majority view).
     Francis (Conflict, 176–81; cf. Carr, JTS 24 [1973] 499, 500), on the other hand, has
argued that the phrase (taking the genitive as subjective) denotes ―the worship which the
angels perform.‖ Using a wide range of sources representing what he terms ascetic-mystic
piety Francis drew attention to the many descriptions of angelic worship. So the Ascension
of Isaiah 7:13–9:33 has a sevenfold description of the angelic worship which the visionary
sees; the Testament of Levi 3:4–8 details the liturgical climax of Levi‘s entry into heaven
(note Rev 4, 5 which records John‘s vision of the heavenly liturgy). Participation in the
angelic worship is detailed in several sources: so Isaiah participates in the worship of the
fifth, sixth and seventh heavens (Asc Isa 7:37; 8:17; 9:28, 31, 33), while the daughters of
Job praise and glorify God in an angelic tongue (Test Job 48–50). Frequently the Qumran
literature refers to the members of the community as priests who offered sacrifice (=the
Qumran way of life) not only before Yahweh but also in communion with the angels (cf.
1QSb 4:25, 26; 1QH 3:20–22, etc; note Kehl, ZKT 91 [1969] 383–92). Francis thus claims
that these texts provide a better background to understanding the ―worship of angels‖ than
does the ―syncretistic‖ view—the initiate is enraptured and participates in the heavenly
worship of God performed by the angels.
Martin (NCB, 94), following Lohse (119), claims that there is ―a fatal objection‖ to Francis‘
view, namely, this reading ―fails because of v 23 where ‗self-chosen worship‘
(ejqeloqrhskiva) specifically characterizes the concept ‗worship‘ (qrhskeiva) as performed
by men‖ (Lohse, 119). But the term ejqeloqrhskiva (―self-made religion,‖ perhaps
―would-be religion,‖ BAG, 218) presents no obstacle to the second interpretation of the
phrase since the term does not specify a cult performed by men. It says no more than that
the advocates of the ―philosophy‖ ―chose/aspired to/gave pretence of some worship … We
could say, if we accepted Lohse‘s translation, that the Colossians chose for themselves the
worship performed by the angels‖ (Francis, Conflict, 182). Accordingly, the false teachers
claimed to have joined in the angelic worship of God as they entered into the heavenly
realm and prepared to receive visions of divine mysteries.
     a{ eJovraken ejmbateuvwn (lit. ―which he has seen upon entering‖). The third quotation
from the catchwords of the ―philosophy‖ is not patently clear, and its precise significance
turns on the meaning of ejmbateuvwn. Because of the difficulty of reducing the phrase to
intelligible terms all sorts of changes have been suggested: (1) one of the earliest attempts
to make sense of the expression was to insert a negative: hence AV ―intruding into those
things which he hath not seen.‖ The negative mhv which denies the reality of the experience
claimed was due to a failure to understand Paul‘s idiom (cf. Bruce, 246, Metzger, Textual
Commentary, 623); and (2) conjectural emendations (see Bruce‘s full note page 248, n. 93)
which appear to be variations of Lightfoot‘s proposal to read kenembateuvw, ―tread the air.‖
None of these suggested emendations carries conviction.
     ejmbateuvw means to ―set foot upon,‖ ―enter‖ (a place, city, sanctuary, etc); ―come into
possession of‖; ―enter into a subject,‖ i.e. investigate it closely (cf. BAG, 254; Preisker,
TDNT 2, 535). The major attempts to unravel the meaning of the phrase (as distinct from
unhelpful conjectures) are as follows:
     (a) In the light of the connotation of ejmbateuvw to ―approach something in order to
investigate it‖ (cf. 2 Macc 2:30; PhiloDeplant 80) Preisker (TDNT 2, 535, 536) argued the
phrase meant: ―what he had seen in a vision, he tried to investigate‖ (in order to gain deeper
insight into divine mysteries). On this view Paul is refuting the earnest quest for knowledge
which characterized the ―philosophy‖ at Colossae (and elsewhere, cf. 2 Tim 3:7; 2 John 9).
According to Preisker the false teachers waited for moments of ecstatic vision and then
entered by painful investigation into what had been seen in ecstasy.
(b) The dominant interpretation takes its point of departure from the use of ejmbateuvw
(―enter‖) as a technical expression in the mystery religions to describe the initiates entering
the sanctuary so as to consult the oracle on completion of the rite (cf. S. Eitrem,
―EMBATEUW. Note sur Col 2, 18, ‖ ST 2 [1948] 90–94). First William Ramsay (in a
communication to the Athenaeum in 1913; for details see Bruce, 249) and then Dibelius
(Conflict, 61–121) drew attention to the inscriptional data from the sanctuary of Apollo at
Klaros. From this evidence Dibelius argued that the time of entering was the climax of the
initiation while the inner sanctuary, or possibly the oracle grotto, is the place one entered.
Building on this fixed use of the term ejmbateuvw (―enter‖) as one element in the mystery
rite, it was assumed that in the Colossian ―philosophy‖ certain cultic rites were performed.
Our expression a{ ejovraken ejmbateuvwn (translated ―as he has had visions of them during
the mystery rites‖) indicates that the one upon whom the initiation rites were performed,
experienced the vision of cosmic secrets. Cultic rites were actually performed in order to
worship the ―angels‖ and the ―elements of the universe.‖ Because of their teaching and
greater experiences the followers of the philosophy were boastful, considering themselves
to be superior to the members of the congregation (cf. Lohse‘s reconstruction, 118–21,
which follows Dibelius‘ presentation closely). Critics of Dibelius have noted that the two
situations are not parallel (cf. Lyonnet, Bib 43 [1962] 417–35, and Conflict, 147–61;
Schweizer, 123, 124, claims the linguistic parallels are uncertain) but exponents of the view
argue that this does not overthrow Dibelius‘ basic model.
     (c) Rejecting the view that the mystery language or practice had penetrated the church
at Colossae, it has been argued that ejmbateuvw does not have the uniform technical
significance that Dibelius and others claimed for it. Francis, first in his article ―Humility
and Angelic Worship in Col 2:18‖ (Conflict, 163–95) but more fully in ―The Background
of EMBATEUEIN (Col 2:18) in Legal Papyri and Oracle Inscriptions (Conflict, 197–207;
the criticisms of Francis by Lohse, 118–20, and Martin, NCB, 94, 95, do not take into
account this development in the latter article), questioned whether the verb had the precise
significance Dibelius gave to it. The term was used broadly in the OT (cf. Josh 19:49, 21)
and the papyri to denote the ―entering into possession of‖ something, particularly the
possession of property (in the legal papyri over a period of six centuries from the third
century B.C. it had this significance). In Joshua the giving of the land constituted the
fulfillment of God‘s promises. To possess the land was to ―have a portion in the Lord‖ and
so to ―have the right to worship him‖ (cf. Josh 22:24–26). Francis argues that the
unexpressed object of ejmbateuvwn (―entering‖) in Colossians is ―not a plot of ground, but it
is a portion in the Lord‖ (Conflict, 199; cf. the tribe of Levi which received no land but their
portion was still the Lord God of Israel). So he holds that the entering here is ―the heavenly
realm‖ (Conflict, 197; he also notes that certain of the fathers explicitly employed
ejmbateuvw with heaven as its object; cf. Nemesius of Emesa, De Nat Horn Matt, 63–65).
Though drawing on a different history of religions background Bousset argued that
Colossians 2:18 could be explained with reference to the heavenly journey of the soul,
while Nock suggested the term ―may indicate some claim to special knowledge obtained on
a visionary entry into heaven‖ (A. D. Nock, ―The Vocabulary of the New Testament,‖ JBL
52 [1933] 131–39, especially 133). Recently Carr (JTS 24 [1973] 492–500) has produced
additional evidence to that of Francis for this meaning of ejmbateuvw (―enter‖) in mystical
asceticism. He claims that Colossians 2:18 is concerned with visions and with the
encountering of the divine in real religious experience. It is the heavenly sanctuary where
the worship conducted by the angels (Carr also understands qrhskeiva` tw`n ajggevlwn as a
subjective genitive) occurs and this appears in the mind of the worshiper. So it was not the
mystery language or practice which was penetrating the church at Colossae. Rather, it was a
similar problem to what was encountered elsewhere: ―claims to spiritual superiority
validated by claims to higher religious experience through mystical-ascetical piety‖ (Carr,
JTS 24 [1973] 500; cf. Bandstra, Dimensions, 329–32).
     Although we may agree with Schweizer (124) that we know too little about the specific
background at Colossae to be certain as to the precise meaning of this phrase, we consider a
stronger case has been made for the third view (c). Dibelius‘ approach (b) has serious
weaknesses (he builds too much on ejmbateuvw as a technical expression), while the first
view (a) though possible is not as cogent as the approach of Francis and others (note the
Introduction).
Whatever the precise spiritual experiences the proponents claimed to have passed through,
their exploitation of these experiences to their own advantage stands in contrast to Paul‘s
apologetic account of the unusual things that happened to him when he ―was caught up to
Paradise. He heard inexpressible things, things that man is not permitted to tell‖ (2 Cor
12:4, NIV; cf. Bruce, 250).
     eijkh`/ fusiouvmeno" uJpo; tou` noo;" th`" sarko;" aujtou`. If in the earlier phrases Paul
has quoted from the catchwords of the philosophy, then with these words he presents the
first of two devastating criticisms: ―his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions‖
(NIV). Being puffed up (fusiovw in the passive means to ―become puffed up,‖ ―become
conceited,‖ BAG, 869) was a standing and characteristic danger of the Corinthians (all the
NT references to the word, apart from Col 2:18, occur in the Corinthian correspondence: 1
Cor 4:6, 18, 19; 5:2; 8:1; 13:4; 2 Cor 12:20). It took various forms: boasting against Paul,
moral indifference (5:2) and exalting oneself above another (4:6). The apostle states that
―knowledge puffs up‖ (8:1) and its proponents are conceited. At Colossae whoever laid
claims to these exalted and heavenly experiences was puffed up. The cause of this conceit
was ―the mind of his flesh‖ (uJpo; tou` noo;" th`" sarko;" aujtou`), an unusual expression
(though cf. Rom 8:7, ―the mind [frovnhma] that is set on the flesh‖) that means the attitude
and outlook which are characteristic of the old nature, dominated by the flesh. The nou`" (cf.
Behm, TDNT 4, 950–60) is that aspect of a man‘s mentality which when enlightened can
distinguish between good and evil, as well as recognize and respond to the claims of God
(Rom 7:21–25; 12:2). It may be controlled by the old nature as long as one goes on living
kata; savrka, ―according to the flesh. ―Perhaps the proponents boasted (eijkh`/ means
―without cause‖) they were directed by the mind (ujpo; tou` noov"); Paul‘s answer is, yes.
But a mind of the flesh! (th`" sarkov" is a possessive or characterizing genitive).
Bornkamm (Conflict, 140; cf. Martin, NCB, 92) suggested they were boasting of their
acquaintance with divine ―fullness‖ and being full of knowledge (gnw`si"), when all they
are full of is their own pride!
19. kaiv ouj kratw`n th;n kefalhvn. ―And not holding fast to the head.‖ The second criticism
is even more devastating: the self-inflation and pride in these private religious experiences
come from not maintaining contact with Christ, the head. kratevw—a verb employed in a
variety of ways (sometimes of arresting [Matt 14:3; 21:46] or of seizing a person forcibly
[Matt 12:11; 18:28])—is used here of ―holding fast to someone‖ and so remaining closely
united to him (cf. Mark 7:3; 2 Thess 2:15; Rev 2:13, 14, 15; note BAG, 448; Michaelis,
TDNT 3, 910–12; the antithesis is ajfivhmi, to ―let go,‖ cf. LXX Song of Sol 3:4, ―I held fast
[ejkravthsa] to him and would not let him go― [oujk ajfhvsw]). The false teacher‘s behavior
shows he is not keeping a close hold of Christ (Best, Body, 126); in fact, it is evidence of
his rejecting the head (the negative ouj, instead of mhv, with the participle is equivalent to an
affirmative sentence meaning ―he is letting go of, or rejecting,‖ Zerwick, Greek, 148; cf.
Dibelius-Greeven, 36, BDF, para. 430[3]). No doubt those who sought to make inroads into
the community presupposed that they were Christians (Percy, Probleme, 142). Indeed, how
else could they have attempted to make these inroads? But they face the most serious of
condemnations: they are severing themselves from the very one who is the source of life
and unity.
     The ―head-body‖ relationship is employed again in this passage (cf. 1:18). Since he is
Lord over all, Christ is described at chapter 2:10 as ―head of every power and principality‖
(though these powers are not said to be part of his body). Here at chapter 2:19 the two
metaphors have to do with his headship over the church. Dibelius-Greeven (36) argued
along similar lines in their exposition of chapters 1:18 and 2:10, that ―body‖ denoted the
cosmos here and ―head‖ the rule over every principality and power. The false teachers hold
to the members of the cosmos-body (i.e. to the principalities and powers) instead of Christ
as the head. But this line of interpretation introduces un-Pauline elements into the argument
(cf. Percy, Probleme, 382–84; Bruce, 251; cf. Robinson, Body, 66) and the view is rejected
as being inadequate (sw`ma does not refer to the cosmos in Pauline thought: cf. Merklein,
Amt, 29, 30, and Bedale, JTS 5 [1954] 214).
     kefalh;n ejx ou\ pa`n to; sw`ma ktl. ―The head from whom the whole body.…‖
Although he is not explicitly named it is clear that Christ is that head (cf. E. D. Roels,
God‘s Mission. The Epistle to the Ephesians in Mission Perspective [Franeker: Wever,
1962] 107). As such he (the concentration on Christ is so strong in the text that the
masculine relative pronoun ―from whom,‖ ejxou\, is used although the word ―head,‖
kefalhv, in Greek is feminine gender; noted by many commentators including Schweizer,
125) is both the source (ejk, ―from,‖ signifies source, while diav, ―through,‖ denotes the
channels through which the nourishment, etc, come) of the sustenance by which the body
lives as well as the source of unity through which it becomes an organic whole (Best, Body,
127). There is no explicit mention of direction by the head. It might be argued, however,
that headship implies this. Further, the suggestion in the immediate context is that each part
of the body will function properly only as it is under the control of the head. If it acts
independently the consequences can be very serious. The false teachers are in great peril
and each member of the congregation should heed the apostle‘s warning.
The human body provides the analogy for Paul‘s description, and the image used here
corresponds to ancient physiology (note the evidence from ancient medical writings in
Lightfoot, 196–98): ajfaiv are the ―joints‖ (lit. the ―points of contact,‖ akin to a{ptomai,
―touch‖) while suvndesmoi are the ―ligaments‖ (cf. BAG, 785; Fitzer, TDNT 7, 856–59)
which provide nourishment (ejpicorhgevw, though understood by Robinson [Ephesians,
186, 187] with reference to Eph 4:16, as ―furnished,‖ or ―equipped,‖ is better taken as
―provided,‖ ―supplied‖ [Lightfoot, 198, and note Moule‘s discussion, 107]; on this
rendering, however, the physiology‘ is not to be pressed as though the joints and ligaments
were strictly the channels of supply) and ―unite‖ the members of the body (on the various
meanings of sumbibavzw, here used figuratively meaning ―unite,‖ ―knit together,‖ see 2:2).
With his illustration about the ligaments, nerves or muscles as we would call them, Paul
indicates that the body is constantly supplied (note the present participles) with energy and
nourishment by the head, and is held together as a unity by that head alone (at Eph 4:16 the
emphasis is upon the vital cohesion and union of the parts with each other, here it focuses
on the continuous dependence on the head). The physiological language is metaphorical;
the joints and ligaments are not to be understood with Masson (198), commenting on
Ephesians 4:1–16 of ministers, who are distinct from ordinary church members, or with
Schnackenburg of office bearers (―Christus, Geist und Gemeinde [Eph 4:1–16],‖ Christ and
Spirit in the New Testament. Studies in honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. B.
Lindars and S. S. Smalley [Cambridge: University Press, 1973] 290; cf. Merklein, Amt,
114, 115; so rightly Schweizer, 126).
    pa`n to; sw`ma … au]xei th;n au]xhsin tou` qeou` The whole body (pa`n tov shows that
no member is to be excluded) which is totally dependent on the head to nourish and unify it
is said (lit.) to ―increase with the increase of God.‖ aujxavnw (and au]xw), meaning to ―cause
to grow,‖ in later Greek came to be used intransitively of to ―grow,‖ ―increase‖ (John 3:30;
Acts 6:7; Eph 4: 15; BDF, paras. 101, 309[2]; BAG, 121). The expression ―the growth of
God‖ (th;n au]xhsin tou` qeou`) is probably, with many recent exegetes, to be understood as
an accusative of content (so BDF, para. 153[1], F.-J. Steinmetz, Protologische
Heils-Zuversicht. Die Strukturen des soteriologischen und christologischen Den kens im
Kolosser- und Epheserbrief. [FTS 2; Frankfurt: Knecht, 1969] 128; Lohse, 122; cf. Matt
2:10; Eph 2:4). But what does the genitive ―of God‖ (tou` qeou`) mean? And how are we to
understand the nature of the growth: in size or in perfection? Because Christ, the head, is
the source (ejx ou|) of the increase then the words ―of God‖ must describe its nature, i.e. it is
a divine type of growth. So the increase comes from Christ and its quality is divine (Best,
Body, 128). This suggests that its growth is in terms of perfection. But does this growth
include a numerical increase, both the inward and the outward (as Steinmetz,
Heils-Zuversicht, 128, argues; Merklein, Amt, 94, refers to it as ―intensive-ethical‖ and
―extensive‖)? Schweizer, with explicit reference to this passage, considers that mission as a
salvation historical phenomenon derives from the notion of the growth of the body. In other
words, growth for him must include numerical increase (Neotestamentica, 301, cf. 327,
328; Merklein, Amt, 94, endorses this pointing out that such a growth is a particular interest
of Colossians, cf. 1:6, 10, where the same verb ―grow,‖ aujxavnw, is found, and especially
1:26, 27). However, without wishing to deny the importance of the world-wide spread of
the gospel (1:6) or the significance of making the mystery known to Gentiles (note
especially 1:24–29), the immediate context has nothing to do with numerical increase; it is
concerned with growth in perfection (at 1:6 the increase is numerical, while at 1:10 it is a
growth in perfection: the mere mention of the term ―increase‖ does not mean that both
notions are necessarily included). Paul here is drawing a contrast between the divine growth
of the whole body (pa`n to; sw`ma) and the individual growth of the Colossian false teachers
(Best, Body, 128). In fact, theirs is not a growth at all; it is a vain puffing up by their fleshly
minds (v 18). The believer cannot grow to perfection alone. The ―growth of God‖ only
occurs as the ―ultimate result‖ of the body‘s union with the head; the nourishment and unity
which come through the joints and ligaments ―are only intermediate processes‖ (Best,
Body, 128, following Lightfoot, 198).
    The application to the Colossian situation is plain: the false teacher who does not
depend on the head has no contact with the source of life and nourishment, and does not
belong to the body. The community must realize that they must remain in living union with
Christ as the head. Let them not be drawn off or enticed away by the appeal of the false
teachers to their heavenly experiences.
20. Paul had already told his readers that they were united with Christ in his death (v 11).
He now takes this up and applies it with special reference to their circumstances.


     eij ajpeqavnete su;n Cristw`/ ajpo; tw`n stoiceivwn tou` kovsmou. Because the Colossians
have died with Christ on the cross (the eij does not express doubt, but means ―if, as is the
case,‖ ―since‖; note 3:3 and cf. BDF, para. 372), then that death severed the bond which
bound them to the ―elemental spirits of the world.‖ Paul normally uses the dative case after
the verb ―die‖ (ajpoqnhvskw) of the person or thing from which one is separated by death
(e.g. Gal 2:19, he died to the law [novmw/], while at Rom 6:2, he speaks of having died to sin
[th`/ aJmartiva/; cf. BAG, 91]). Here the preposition translated ―to‖ really means ―from,‖ that
is, ―out of the control of‖ (BDF, para. 211, consider ajpov is used here for a genitive of
separation with the added thought of alienation). Robinson (Body, 43) has caught the sense
well with his rendering: ―Ye died with Christ out from under the elements of the world.‖ As
death breaks the bond which binds a subject to his ruler so dying with Christ severs the
bond that bound the Colossians to the slavery of the principalities and powers (on the
meaning of ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou see 129–132).
     tiv wJ" xw`nte" ejn kovsmw/ dsgmativxesqe. The application is made by means of a
rhetorical question and a rebuke (cf. Martin, NCB, 96): ―How can you, as if you still lived in
a worldly way, voluntarily place yourselves under the regulations?‖ kovsmo" (―world,‖ in
the phrase ejn kovsmw/) is interpreted by exegetes in various ways, depending on their
understanding of the ―elements of the world‖ (ta; stoicei`a tou` kovsmou). So Schweizer
(126, 127) argues that the two expressions mean the same thing, while Bandstra (Law, 69)
contends the reference is to― the world of mankind, the whole sphere of human activity.‖
On the view that the ―elements‖ denote personal forces such as the principalities and
powers it is best to take the phrase as describing the situation in which the world dominates
a person‘s existence, the old way of life (Caird, 200, renders the phrase by ―worldly‖).
     dogmativzw means to ―represent and affirm an opinion or tenet,‖ ―establish or publish a
decree,‖ ―proclaim an edict‖ (Kittel, TDNT 2, 231; cf. LSJ, 441, and Lohse, 123). It is akin to
dovgma (―decree,‖ ―ordinance‖) used in the plural at chapter 2:14 of the regulations with
their penalty clauses associated with the signed acknowledgment of our indebtedness
before God. Here the restrictive regulations have particular reference to ordinances of taste
and touch (v 21 lists three of them), though we should not suppose that the verb is
specifically limited to these. The passive voice of the verb carries the notion of ―allowing
oneself to be …‖ (some older grammarians took the verb as a middle voice with much the
same significance, so Robertson, Grammar, 807, ―probably direct middle‖; Abbott, 272, cf.
Turner, Syntax, 57), so that a literal rendering is ―let yourself be regulated‖ (BDF, para. 314;
cf. 1 Cor 6:7). The point is that the Colossians were in danger of falling victim to the false
teaching and of voluntarily placing themselves under the regulations imposed by these
powers (Hooker, Christ, 317, considers that the admonition does not mean the Colossian
Christians have already submitted to the regulations). This was tantamount to reverting to
the slavery previously experienced in their pagan past (cf. Gal 4:3, 8, 9).
21. mh; a{yh/ mhde; geuvsh/ mhde; qivgh/". ―Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not even touch!‖
Paul quotes three examples of the sorts of regulations imposed by the principalities and
powers. They are all negative and admit of no exceptions (note the OT apodictic laws). It
has been suggested that, because of the form in which the regulations are cited here, Paul is
ridiculing his opponents (so Lohse, 123, who cites Chrysostom with approval: ―Mark how
he makes sport of them, handle not, touch not, taste not, as though they were keeping
themselves clear of some great matters‖) attributing to them a total withdrawal from all
worldly contacts (Caird, 200).
    The three verbs appear to deal with regulations concerning food and drink (cf. v 16).
However, the first and last words are virtually synonymous (cf. LXX Exod 19:12) and it is
difficult to pinpoint any distinction between them. Bauer (BAG, 102, 103) suggested as a
possibility that a{ptomai could be translated to ―eat something‖ (like our ―touch food‖).
Accordingly, the three prohibitions would form an anticlimax: ―Do not eat, do not taste, do
not touch!‖ But a{ptomai has a more general meaning than ―eat‖ and this suggestion is
unlikely. On the basis of it being used with a sexual connotation (cf. 1 Cor 7:1, ―It is good
for a man not to touch a woman,‖ gunaiko;" mh; a{ptesqai), R. Leaney proposed that the
false teachers forbade sexual relations (―Colossians ii. 21–23. [The use of prov"],‖ ExpTim
64 [1952–53] 92). But this is unlikely for the following reasons: first, nowhere else in this
letter is there the slightest hint of a prohibition of sexual relations (the false teachers of 1
Timothy 4:3 forbade marriage but there gamevw, ―marry,‖ is used). Second, when a{ptomai
is employed with this connotation the object of the verb makes plain that this is meant (cf.
Gen 20:4, 6; Prov 6:29; 1 Cor 7:1). The verb by itself can apply to a wide range of areas.
Third, the immediately following words (v 22, ―These are all destined to perish with use‖)
suggest material objects such as food and drink are in view: verse 22a does not apply if
sexual relations are meant.
    If as Lightfoot (201) and others have suggested a{ptomai can have a somewhat stronger
connotation than the rather colorless word qiggavnw and means to ―take hold of‖ something
with a view to possessing it (Lohse, 123) then the threefold prohibition could refer to
defilement incurred through the sense of touch, though in different degrees: ―Handle not,
nor yet taste, nor even touch.‖
22. Several criticisms of the false teachers‘ approach are set forth by the apostle: (1) a{
ejstin pavnta eij" fqora;n th`/ ajpocrhvsei. The things covered by the taboos are perishable
objects of the material world, destined to pass away when used (the expression ejstin eij"
denotes appointment = ―is destined for‖; cf. Acts 8:20; 2 Pet 2:12: so Oepke, TDNT 2, 428).
Paul is probably thinking especially, but not exclusively, of food (cf. Harder, TDNT 9, 102).
fqorav refers to the ―physical dissolution‖ (Abbott, 274) of such things in their natural use
(ajpovcrhsi", ―consuming,‖ ―using up,‖ so BAG, 102; although the term can have, on
occasion, the connotation ―abuse,‖ this does not fit the present context where the reference
is to physical objects being used in a proper and ordinary manner). If these objects are
transient and perishable then the proponents of the ―philosophy‖ lack a true sense of
proportion by making them issues central to their teaching. Matters of food and drink are of
no consequence as far as godliness is concerned (Rom 14:17; 1 Cor 6:13)—particularly
when a test case is made of their abstinence or enjoyment (Martin, Lord, 96; for Paul
overindulgence that leads to gluttony and drunkenness is another question, 1 Cor 5:9; Eph
5:18, as is food offered to idols, 1 Cor 8). (See R. J. Austgen, Natural Motivation in the
Pauline Epistles. 2nd ed. [Notre Dame: University Press, 1969] especially chapter v,
―Natural Motivation and Dietary Practices,‖ 98–117.) There may be the further point, as
Lohse, 124, has suggested, that because of their false legalism the proponents failed to
recognize God‘s good gifts and his purpose of giving them, namely, that all without
exception (pavnta) should be consumed through proper use.
     (2) kata; ta; ejntavlmata kai; didaskaliva" tw`n ajnurwvpwn. Paul‘s second indictment
is that these taboos are merely human inventions: they are ―according to the regulations and
doctrines of men.‖ Behind the phrase lies the wording of Isaiah 29:13 (LXX) which reads:
―But in vain do they worship me teaching the commandments and doctrines of men‖
(ejntavlmata ajnqrwvpwn kai; didaskaliva"). In the original context the prophet complains
that Israel‘s religion is not a personal knowledge of God but a set of conventional rules
learned by rote. The text was cited by Jesus in the Gospels (Mark 7:7; cf. Matt 15:9) in his
dispute with the Pharisees and scribes about the ―tradition of men‖ (hJ paravdosi" tw`n
ajqrwvpwn), by which the Jews had nullified the word of God. That tradition is likened to the
―commandments and doctrines of men,‖ an interesting juxtaposition for in Colossians 2 the
same two expressions are employed: verse 8, ―the tradition of men‖ (hj paravdosi" tw`n
ajnqrwvpwn), and this text. The second reference may be regarded as a ―concretizing‖ of the
earlier phrase, i.e. the tradition of men finds concrete expression in manmade
commandments and teachings.
     ejntavlmata (―commandments‖) occurs only three times in the NT (Matt 15:9; Mark 7:7;
Col 2:22), each of which is an echo of the Isaiah text (29:13). In the Colossians reference it
is closely linked with didaskalivai (―teachings,‖ by means of the one definite article). The
plural in the LXX is significant since it suggests a multiplicity of human teachings that lay
no claim to absoluteness but stand over against the revelation of the will of God (cf.
Rengstorf, TDNT 2, 161). Paul brings out the same point here about the ordinances being
merely human with his emphasis on the last part of the phrase, tw`n ajnqrwvpwn: ―You died
with Christ and yet receive orders from men!‖ These taboos of human origin frustrate the
pure teaching of God with its liberating message.
     23. (3) Paul continues his attack on the false teaching. The verse is not entirely clear as
to its structure and meaning for it is not always certain when the apostle is quoting from
catchwords of the opponents or making his own comments (cf. Moule, 108–10, Masson,
137, and Schweizer, 128). Some exegetes, assuming that the text was corrupted very early,
sought to reconstruct it by means of conjectural emendations and additions (Nestle wanted
to begin a new sentence with ―severity‖ [ajfeidiva in the nominative case], cf. von
Dobschütz; B. G. Hall, ―Colossians II. 23,‖ ExpTim 36 (1924–25) 285, considers that
―forgetting‖ was original, while others would add a line; for details see Lohse, 125, n.88).
But none of these can claim any manuscript support since the manuscript tradition has
retained the ―obscurities‖ intact! In our estimation the most satisfactory explanation of the
ambiguities is that presented by Reicke (ST 6 [1952] 39–53; cf. Bengel 2, 466) and
supplemented with additional arguments by Hollenbach (NTS 25 [1978–79] 254–61). The
punctuation and rendering are as follows:
     a{tinav ejstin—lovgon me;n e[conta sofiva" ejn ejqeloqrhskiva/ kaiv tapeinofrosuvnh/
kaiv ajfeidiva` swvmato", oujk ejn timh`/ tini—pro;" plhsmonh;n th`" sarkov".
―Which things lead—though having a reputation for wisdom in the spheres of voluntary
worship, humility and severe treatment of the body, without any value whatsoever—to the
gratification of the flesh.‖
    On this interpretation ejstin, (translated ―are‖ because of the plural subject a{tina,
―which things‖) is not joined with e[conta (―having‖) to form a periphrastic present tense,
but rather stands alone as the predicate of the main clause, which is a{tinav ejstin … pro;"
plhsmonh;n th`" sarkov" (―which things [actually] lead to the gratification of the flesh‖).
The conjunction mevn (―though‖) appears as the second word in its clause (lovgon me;n
e]conta ktl. ―though having a reputation …‖), its normal position in the Pauline epistles
and marks a subordinate clause as being concessive in relation to its main clause. It should,
therefore, be translated as ―though‖ (cf. Rom 7:25b; 8:10). Parallels to the construction
ejstin prov" signifying ―lead to‖ are to be found at John 11:4, ―This disease will not lead to
(oujk ejstin prov") death,‖ and at 1 Corinthians 14:26, ―May everything be done in such a
way that it may lead to edification (pro;" oijkodomh; ginevsqw).‖
    (Hollenbach, NTS 25 [1978–79] 255, has demonstrated in detail that ―virtually every
occurrence of mevn, regardless of its function, is immediately after the first word of the
grammatical unit to which the mevn pertains‖; the exceptions he adequately explains: mevn,
―on the one hand,‖ ―though,‖ would normally be followed by the correlative dev, ―on the
other hand‖: Lightfoot, 203, has pointed out that such suppressions were common enough
in classical writers, e.g., Plato, and he claims that here an exact correlative is found in a new
form oujk ejn timh`/ tini, ―without any honor,‖ cf. Moule, 108, BDF, para. 477[2], [3],
Robertson, Grammar, 1152, and Lohse, 126. Reicke, ST 6 [1952] 43, argued it was an
example of mevn, solitarium, not an elliptical correlative, which appears absolutely like mhvn,
―indeed,‖ ―and yet,‖ cf. Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 147. It seems best, however, to consider
that the dev would normally have occurred after the first word of the clause to which the
concessive clause is subordinate, i.e. after a{tina, ―which things‖; but since the concessive
clause is embedded within the main clause by the time the mevn was written the proper place
to insert dev was already past—hence the omission, so Hollenbach, NTS 25 [1978–79] 260.)
a{tina (―which things,‖ cf. Gal 4:24; 5:19; Phil 3:7), a relative of quality, points back not so
much to ―the commandments and teachings‖ (ta; ejntavlmata kai; didaskaliva", v 22) as
Masson (137) supposed, but to the precepts or regulations included under dogmativzesqe
(―you let yourselves be regulated‖), of which verse 21 contains illustrations (Williams,
115): ―Handle not, don‘t taste, don‘t even touch!‖ Verse 22 with its relative a{ (―which‖)
makes an objective statement about the regulations, whereas this remark (a{tina, ―which
sort of things‖) characterizes and condemns not only the particular precepts of verse 21 but
also others falling within the same category (Lightfoot, 203).
    lovgon me;n e[conta sofiva". Prohibitions of this kind carry a reputation for wisdom.
lovgon e[cw means to ―have the reputation of,‖ ―be considered as‖ (on other connotations
see Lightfoot, 203, 204), with lovgo" signifying ―reputation,‖ ―credit‖ (LSJ, 1059). It is
employed to denote that which has no substance to it and stands in contrast to ajlhqeiva,
―truth‖ (it is synonymous with mu`uo", ―rumor,‖ ―fable,‖ cf. Stählin, TDNT 4, 770;
Chrysostom aptly remarked: ―neither the power, nor the truth‖). Even though the
regulations have the reputation for wisdom they lack the reality. This wisdom is only a
facade (note the play on filosoyiva, ―philosophy,‖ 2:8 and sofiva, ―wisdom‖); true
wisdom is to be found in Christ alone (2:3; cf. 1:9, 28; 3:16) for he is the wisdom of God
(1:15–20). Zeilinger (Der Erstgeborene, 128, 129) has recently contended that in the
phrase, ―having the appearance of wisdom,‖ there is a deliberate polemic on the part of the
author against a Jewish view (cf. Bar 4:1–4) which regarded the preexistent Torah (=
Wisdom, sofiva) as the ground of all things; humility, reverencing of angels and the
practice of ascetic severity leads ultimately to the possession of wisdom, the resurrection of
the dead and with them the possession of life in the coming age. Against this the author
argues that salvation from Christ is already objectively present—in Christ the gift of the
eschaton has already been given.
    ejn ejuelourhskiva` kai; tapeinofrosuvnh/ kai; ajfeidiva` swvmato". The false teachers‘
reputation for wisdom was acquired ―in the sphere of (ejn, so Williams, 116, Schweizer,
128; Meyer, 410, regards the preposition as instrumental) voluntary worship, humility and
severe treatment of the body.‖ ejqeloqrhskiva, a term which does not occur in Greek before
Paul, is rendered by the RSV as ―rigor of devotion‖ (BAG, 218, ―self-made religion,‖ it
cannot, however, be rendered in this way if Paul, as we contend, is actually quoting a
catchword of the philosophy). At least three areas of meaning may be in view for
compounds formed with ejqelo-(BDF, para. 118[2], who regard this as modelled after filo-,
consider the first element governs the second, qrhskeiva): (a) voluntariness, e.g. ―voluntary
servitude‖ (ejqelodouleiva; MM, 181, think ejqeloqrhskiva is a Pauline coinage on the
analogy of this word); (b) interest, including delight or endeavor, e.g. ―aiming at fashion‖
(ejqelavsteio"); and (c) pretense, as in ―would-be philosopher‖ (ejqelofilovsoyo", so
Francis, Conflict, 181). In all cases the separate nuances point to the action of the will in
different circumstances (hence BDF’s point about the first element of the compound
governing the second, para. 118[2]). If this term, along with the other two, was used by
Paul‘s opponents, then it presumably meant that they had freely chosen the cult in which
they participated. It corresponds to qrhskeiva tw`n ajggevlwn of verse 18 which we have
rendered the ―worship which the angels perform‖ (see above 142, 143). Here the term
ejqeloqrhskiva does not specify that it is worship performed by men (as Lohse, 119, and
Martin, NCB, 94, suggested in their criticism of Francis, Conflict, 176–81), only that it is a
freely chosen worship. If Paul did not coin the word but took it over from the ―philosophy‖
then it is ―a sarcastic borrowing from his opponents‘ language‖ (W. L. Knox, St Paul and
the Church of the Gentiles [Cambridge: University Press, 1939, 171] cited by Martin, NCB,
98). The apostle regards this worship as freely chosen but wrong!
tapeinofrosuvnh/. See above on verse 18 (142) where it is suggested that the term has to
do with fasting and other bodily rigors. Ascetic practices such as these were a kind of
―humility technique‖ and regarded as effective for receiving visions of the heavenly
mysteries. The false teachers‘ reputation for wisdom was acquired in this sphere also.
    ajfeidiva/ swvmato". The advocates of the ―philosophy‖ described their way of life as
―severe (lit. ―unsparing,‖ akin to feivdomai) treatment of the body‖ (BAG, 124), an
expression that denotes a rigorous and austere way of life particularly with reference to the
ascetic activity required by the regulations (cf. 1 Tim 4:3, ―who forbid marriage and enjoin
abstinence from foods‖). By means of fasting and abstinence they thought to prepare
themselves for divine fullness and the reception of visions. Yet this too was nothing more
than the mere appearance of wisdom (lovgon … sofiva").
    oujk ejn timh`/ tini. ―Without any value whatsoever.‖ On the basis of the above
mentioned explanation this clause is regarded as subordinate to the preceding words and is
Paul‘s comment. Whether the exponents of the ―philosophy‖ employed the word timhv
(―honor,‖ ―value‖) as a slogan or not, the apostle‘s assertion that the practice of these false
teachers, though having a reputation for wisdom in the sphere of voluntary worship,
humility and severe treatment of the body, is of no value whatsoever.
    Although many commentators link the words ojuk ejn timh`/ tini, ―without any value
whatsoever,‖ with what immediately follows pro;" plhsmonh;n th`" sarkov", ―for the
satisfaction of the flesh,‖ as comprising one clause, this involves several difficulties: the
position of oujk, ―not,‖ is irregular and we would have expected it to precede ejstin, ―is‖;
the meaning of the whole clause, and especially timhv, is obscure; there is no precedent for
ejn timh`/, ―with honor,‖ as a complement of ejstin, ―is‖; nor of timhv (―honor‖) occurring
with a following prov" (―for‖); and none of the attested meanings of timhv seems to fit the
context. Note the attempts of Lightfoot, 204–206, Moule, 108–110, and Lohse, 126, 127,
and see Hollenbach‘s critique, NTS 25 (1978–79) 258, 259.
    a{tinav ejstin … pro;" plhsmonh;n th`" sarkov". The following are the most significant
attempts to explain the meaning of this clause. Our preference is for the third suggestion:
    (1) Many of the early fathers regarded the latter phrase as a further description of the
Colossians‘ ascetic practices. They equated savrx (―flesh‖) with sw`ma (―body‖), took it in a
positive sense and understood the phrase to mean ―legitimate bodily satisfaction.‖ On this
ancient interpretation the false teachers do not indulge the body, that is, they do not show it
the respect given by God. They deprive it rather than satisfy it (cf. Delling‘s presentation,
TDNT 6, 133). However, several difficulties with this interpretation ought to be noted: (a)
the links with the phrase ―severe treatment of the body‖ (ajfeidiva swvmato") are awkward
(so Moule, 109); (b) plhsmonhv can hardly be rendered ―reasonable wants‖ or ―legitimate
bodily satisfaction‖ in the light of savrx (―flesh,‖ cf. v 18) which appears to stand in
contrast to sw`ma (―body‖) in the preceding clause and ought to be understood in Paul‘s
usual sense of ―lower nature,‖ the old Adam-nature in its rebellion against God (Bruce,
256, and BAG, 673). (c) On this ancient view the apostle‘s criticism is much too soft. He is
not timidly remarking that the regulations fail because they do not hold the body in
sufficient honor. Rather, this legalistic way of life leads only ―to the satisfaction of the
flesh.‖
(2) Lightfoot (204–206, cf. Moule, 108–110), who interpreted the final phrase in
conjunction with the preceding words (see above), rendered the Greek of the clause as ―yet
not really of any value to remedy indulgence of the flesh.‖ Apart from the difficulties
already mentioned about this conjunction of phrases, the rendering of prov" as ―against,‖ in
the sense of combating, is unusual and does not read as easily as the following view.
    (3) The Colossian proponents‘ legalistic way of life leads only to the satisfaction of the
flesh. plhsmonhv (―satisfaction,‖ ―gratification,‖ BAG, 673, Delling, TDNT 6, 131–34),
which appears only here in the NT, occurred some twenty-eight times in the LXX. It was
frequently used in a good sense to denote ―satisfaction,‖ especially with food and drink, and
other types of enjoyment (of satisfaction by nourishment: Exod 16:3, 8; Lev 25:19; 26:5; Ps
77:25; Hag 1:6; of the gifts of God which satisfy: Deut 33:23); but the term also occurred in
a bad sense to denote ―excess‖ or ―satiety‖ which led to sin and apostasy from the Lord
(Ezek 39:19; Hos 13:6). Probably behind Paul‘s use of plhsmonhv there is a play on the
word ―fullness.‖ The false teachers were concerned about ―fullness of life.‖ The aim and
goal (prov") of all their efforts—the observance of the strict regulations, the reverence and
respect paid to the principalities and powers—was satisfaction. But all that was satisfied
was ―the flesh‖ (th" sarkov"). Their energetic religious endeavors could not hold the flesh
in check. Quite the reverse. These man-made regulations actually pandered to the flesh.

Explanation
    In a paragraph that is polemical in style and filled with allusions to the teaching and
catch-words of the philosophy Paul sets out what is, in effect, a charter of Christian
freedom. False notions about ―fullness,‖ and the person and work of Christ, which are
corrected in Paul‘s positive affirmations of chapter 2:8–15, have as their corollary these
strange aberrations on the practical side. The apostle‘s criticisms are devastating as he
trains his guns first on the practices and the false notions lying behind them, then on the
false teachers themselves.
    The Colossians ought not to be taken to task by the adherents of the ―philosophy‖ over
matters of food, drink or holy days. Their stringent regulations of an ascetic nature which
follow from the demand for ―severe treatment of the body‖ (v 23) are a shadow of the
things that were to come. Christ and his new order are the perfect reality to which these
earlier ordinances pointed forward. The rigorous prescriptions of the false teachers have no
binding force. The reality has already come and the things of the shadow no longer
constitute a norm for judgment.
In writing to Corinth and Rome, where Christians had scruples about food and drink as well
as the observance of holy days, Paul introduces the principle of Christian liberty, namely,
―the strong‖ should go out of their way to avoid offending the tender consciences of ―the
weak‖ or scrupulous (Rom 14:1–15:13; 1 Cor 8–10). This, however, was not the issue at
Colossae: the scrupulous were threatening to impose their rigid principles on the rest of the
congregation. Christian liberty needed to be asserted in the light of false attempts to
undermine it.
    Further, if the Colossians were to fall victims to the false teaching and voluntarily
placed themselves under rules and regulations, imposed by the principalities and powers,
such as ―Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not even touch!‖ this would be to go back into
slavery again, a servitude to the very principalities of the universe from which they had
been freed when they died with Christ in his death. The matters covered by the taboos were
perishable objects of the material world, destined to pass away when used. These taboos
were merely human inventions, ―the commandments and doctrines of men,‖ which
frustrated the pure teaching of God with its liberating message. Although the prohibitions
(of which v 21 contains illustrations) carry a reputation for wisdom in the spheres of
voluntary worship, humility and severe treatment of the body, they were without any value
whatsoever.
Concerning the false teachers the apostle‘s words are just as severe. Those who laid claim
to exalted heavenly experiences or visions as a prelude to fresh divine revelations were
puffed up. They may have claimed that they were directed by the mind; but it was a mind
of flesh. Theirs was the attitude and outlook which were characteristic of the old nature,
dominated by the flesh. If they boasted of their acquaintance with divine ―fullness‖ and
knowledge, then all they were full of was their own pride! Worst of all those who took the
Christians at Colossae to task, using their own private religious experiences as the basis of
their authority, were in fact rejecting Christ as their head, the one who is the source of life
and nourishment by which his body lives, and the source of unity through which it becomes
an organic whole. The advocates of the false teaching face the most serious of
condemnations: they are severed from the very one who is the source of life and unity. The
application to the Colossians is plain: let them not be drawn off or enticed away by the
appeal of the false teaching.
Seek the Things Above (3:1–4)
Bibliography
Dupont, J. SUN CRISTWI. L‘union avec le Christ suivant saint Paul. Paris: Desclée de Brouwer,
1952, 39–47. Grässer, E. ZTK 64 (1967) 139–68. Lincoln, A. T. The Heavenly Dimension. Studies
in the Role of Heaven in Paul‘s Thought with Special Reference to His Eschatology. University of
Cambridge: Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, 1977, 198–217. Merk, O. Handeln aus Glauben. Die
Motivierungen der paulinischen Ethik. Marburger Theologische Studien 5. Marburg: Elwert, 1968,
201–204. Moule, C. F. D. ― ‗The New Life‘ in Colossians 3:1–17.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 481–93.
Schnackenburg, R. Baptism, 67–73. Schrage, W. Die konkreten Einzelgebote in der paulinischen
Paränese. Gütersloh: Mohn, 1961. Wulf, F. ― ‗Suchet, was droben ist, wo Christus ist, sitzend zur
Rechten Gottes!‘ (Kol 3, 1).‖ GuL 41 (1968) 161–64, Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene, 60–63,
147–51.

Translation
1
  Since then you were raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at
God‘s right hand. 2Set your minds on the things above, not on earthly things, 3For you died,
and your life is hidden with Christ in God. 4When Christ, who is oura life, is revealed, then
you also will be revealed with him in glory.

Notes
a. Throughout Colossians there is some doubt about the correct reading between the first
and second person plurals (cf. 1:7; 2:13 and this text). Here it is possible that hJmw`n (―our‖),
which is supported by B Dc H K 326 syrp,h copsa etc;, was altered by scribes to uJnw`n so as to
bring it into line with the second person pronouns throughout verses 1–4. However, the
reading uJmw`n (―your‖) has considerably stronger manuscript support, including P46 and
good representatives of both the Alexandrian and Western text types (a
 C D* F G P
            31 81 it vg copbo etc; cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 624). Accordingly, if
uJmw`n (―your‖) was the original reading the change to hJmw`n (―our‖) may have been due to
faulty hearing or because the copyist wished to maintain the point that Christ is the life of
Christians generally and not simply of those at Colossae. On balance it seems more likely
that the reading ―our life‖ (hJ zwh; uJmw`n) was the original text and was altered very early to
conform to the second person style of this section of the letter.

Form/Structure/Setting
    The short section of four verses commencing with the words eij ou|n sunhgerqhte tw`/
Cristw`/ (―since therefore you were raised with Christ‖) serves as an important transition
piece in the letter (cf. Grässer, ZTK 64 [1967] 146, Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 30, 31,
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 60–62, Schweizer, 130, 131). On the one hand, it rounds off
what has been said previously serving as the conclusion to the author‘s polemic against the
―philosophy‖ of the false teachers (2:8–23) and presenting the true alternative to that
teaching (Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 61). On the other hand, it marks a new beginning
spelling out programmatically the inferences of the preceding for the walk of believers
(Lähnemann, Kolosserbrief, 30). So the ou|n (―therefore,‖ v 1, cf. vv 5, 12) indicates that
what follows is connected with the train of thought previously developed (cf. the similar
function of the conjunction at Rom 12:1; Eph 4:1). By means of the introductory
sunhgevrqhte (―you were raised with,‖ v 1) the apostle takes up the sunhgevrqhte (―you
were raised with‖) and the sunezwopoivhsen (―he made you alive together with‖) of
chapter 2:12, 13, at the same time preparing for the summons to ―put on the new man‖ of
chapter 3:12. With the ajpeqavnete (―you died,‖ v 3) Paul harks back to the ajpeqavnete su;n
Cristw`/ ajto; tw`n stoiceivwn tou` kovsmou (―you died with Christ from the elemental
spirits of the universe,‖ 2:20), and picks up ideas expressed in chapter 2:11–13 (―you were
circumcised … in the circumcision of Christ … you were buried with him‖), at the same
time providing the basis for the imperative in the exhortatory section nekrwvsate (―put to
death,‖ 3:5). The ta; a[nw (―the things above,‖ vv 1, 2) which designates the transcendent
heavenly realm at the center of which is the exalted Christ is perhaps a summary expression
reiterating the points made in chapters 1 and 2 about the lordship of Christ (cf. 1:15–20;
2:6, 10), at the same time providing the point of orientation for the new man (3:10). ta; ejpi;
th`" gh`" (―earthly things,‖ v 2), whatever else it involves, clearly refers back to chapter
2:20–23 and designates the instruction and practice of the false teachers. At the same time
the phrase is picked up and used generally to describe the catalog of vices (3:5). Like
chapter 2:6, 7 these four verses stand at an important pivotal point in the letter.
    Structurally the section may be divided into two parts: verses 1, 2, and verses 3, 4 (note
Zeilinger‘s analysis, Der Erstgeborene, 60–62). Verse 1 contains three clauses, an
introductory conditional clause eij ou\n sunhgevrqhte tw`/ Cristw`/ (―if [= since] then you
were raised with Christ‖), a principal clause with its imperative ta; a]nw zhtei`te (―seek the
things above‖) and an indirect question (in its present form it is an adverbial clause of
place), ou\ oJ Cristov" ejstin ejn dexiva/ tou` qeou` kaqhvmeno" (―where Christ is, seated at
the right hand of God‖). Verse 2 contains two imperatival clauses set in a short antithesis:


ta; a[nw fronei`te

mh; ta; ejpi; th`" gh`"

―Set your mind on things above

not on earthly things.‖

Unlike the earlier antitheses of chapter 2:8, 16 and 17, 18 and 19, where the negative
statement or injunction occurs first and is followed by its positive contrasting assertion,
here the positive exhortation is spelled out fi
    The second part of the section, verses 3 and 4, is joined to the preceding (gavr, ―for,‖ v
3) and provides the basis for the earlier exhortations. In verse 3 the orientation is toward the
past, while in verse 4 it is directed to the future (note the verbs used: v 3, ajpeqavnete, ―you
died,‖ and kevkruptai, ―has been hidden‖; v. 4, fanerwqh`/, ―is manifested,‖ i.e. in the
future, and fanerwqhvsesqe , ―you will be manifested‖). Yet the two verses may be
paralleled as follows (cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 61, 62):


v. 3a
ajpeqavnete ga;r
4a
o{tan oJ Cristo;" fanerwqh`/

b
kai; hJ zwh; uJmw`n
b
—hJ zwh; hJuw`n—

c
kevkruptai su;n tw`/ Cristw`/
c
tovte kai; uJmei`" su;n aujtw`/ yanerwqhvsesqe

d
ejn tw`/ qew`/
d
ejn dovxh/

v. 3a
―For you died
4a
―When Christ appears

b
and your life
b
—our life—

c
is hidden with Christ
c
then you also will appear with him

d
in God.‖
d
in glor

Comment
    The major hortatory section of the letter begins with Paul‘s reminder that the Colossians
not only died with Christ in his death (2:20, cf. vv 11, 12) but they were also raised from
the dead with him (2:12, sunhgevrqhte). This short paragraph of four verses also concludes
the ―doctrinal‖ section of the epistle for it rounds out what has previously been said by the
apostle against the ―philosophy‖ of the false teachers (2:8–23) presenting the true
alternative to that teaching: since you have shared in Christ‘s resurrection your aims,
ambitions, in fact your whole outlook, are to be centered in him, in that place of highest
honor where God has exalted him. Chapter 3:1–4, like the earlier short section chapter 2:6,
7, serves as an important bridge passage in the epistle, drawing together themes previously
mentioned (2:11, 12, 13, 20), at the same time setting forth the theological foundation (the
―indicative‖) for the exhortation (the ―imperative‖) that follows.
Although Paul is not dealing directly with the catchwords of the false teachers it is possible
that the positive expressions set forth in verses 1–4 show that the controversy is still in
view (Grässer‘s contention, however, that all the formulations are polemically directed is
difficult to prove, ZTK 64 [1967] 151; for a more cautious approach see Lähnemann,
Kolosserbrief 53).
    1. eij ou\n sunhgevrqhte tw`/ Cristw`/. With the assertion, ―since, therefore, you were
raised with Christ,‖ the apostle consciously sets forth the positive counterpart to chapter
2:20, ―since you died with Christ‖ (the eij ou\n is resumptive of eij in 2:20, while the eij [=
―since‖] no more suggests doubt here than it did in the earlier reference, a point which
incidentally is confirmed by 3:3 ajpeqavnete gavr, ―for you died,‖ cf. Williams, 121, and
Delling, TDNT 7, 686). He does not finish with the negative statement that Christians have
been set free from the rule of the evil powers, but presses on to make the positive assertion
about their being raised with Christ together with its implications. What follows then is
connected with the train of thought previously developed (cf. Lohse, 132; the ou\n
―therefore‖ [cf. vv 5, 12], functions as in Rom 12:1; Eph 4:1): you have been raised with
Christ for new life. sunhgevrqhte (―you were raised‖) picks up the same word from chapter
2:12 (cf. v 13, ―he [God] made you alive together with him [Christ]‖) while the definite
article tw`/, ―the‖ (before Cristw`/, ―Christ,‖ an instance of the article of renewed mention),
makes plain that it is in union with the same person with whom they died (ajteqajnete su;n
Cristw`/, 2:20) that they have been raised. Again it is noted that the Colossians‘ resurrection
with Christ is described as a past act (see the discussion at 2:12; the aorist tense,
sunhgevrqhte, does not indicate that the author is advocating perfectionism, as Grässer, ZTK
64 [1967] 161, claims). If their death with him severed the links that bound them to the old
order, then their resurrection with him established links with a new and heavenly order
(Bruce, 258).
    ta; a]nw zhtei`te. Because the readers have been raised with Christ, their lives are to be
different: they have no life of their own since their life is the life of Christ. So their interests
must be his interests. In Romans 6 the imperatives are based on the past death with Christ
(vv 2–4); here the admonition is grounded in their past resurrection with him (cf. Tannehill,
Dying, 47, and Schweizer, 131). The apostle had previously been at pains to point out that
the Colossian readers had been ―filled in him [Christ].‖ (For a discussion of the emphasis
on a ―realized eschatology‖ in this letter see 119–121.) This did not mean, however, that all
things had been consummated or that the eschaton had already arrived. The future element
is mentioned in this paragraph: their new life was currently hidden with Christ in God (v 3)
but awaited its manifestation at the Parousia (v 4); while the exhortation with its ongoing
responsibility to ―seek the things above‖ presupposes that they are not yet perfect
(Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 149).
zhtevw, a term which has a wide range of meanings like the English word ―seek‖ (see BAG,
339), has particular reference to the orientation of man‘s will (Greeven, TDNT 2, 893),
which can be directed to unprofitable aims (Rom 10:3; 1 Cor 1:22) or to worthwhile ends
(Rom 2:7). Here the readers are told to look upward so as to receive clear direction for their
conduct. The present imperative shows that a continuous ongoing effort is required,
something that would not occur naturally. Paul employs zhtei`te as a direct command only
here (it turns up as an indirect one at 1 Cor 10:24; cf. 1 Cor 14:12; 10:33; 13:5; Phil 2:21; 1
Thess 2:6), so its force may be to provide a positive counterpart to the false teachers‘
energetic activity in ―seeking‖ visionary experiences (cf. Lincoln, Dimension, 202; Grässer,
ZTK 64 [1967] 151, asserts that both imperatives ―seek‖ and ―consider‖ correspond
antithetically to the activities of the false teachers who with their asceticism, visions, and so
on, sought to be free from the spiritual powers—activities which the author calls zhtei`n ta;
ejti; th`" gh`", ―to seek what is on earth‖).
     The imperative that follows from the present possession of Christ‘s resurrection life is
phrased in spatial terms (cf. Grässer, ZTK 64 [1967] 154–59, Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht,
30, 31, 43, 44, and Lincoln, Dimension, 200–206): ―Seek the things above‖ (ta; a[nw
zhtei`te). Paul has already used the term ―heaven(s)‖ (oujranov": in the plural at 1:5, 16, 20;
note the singular at 1:23; cf. 4:1), and here in verses 1 and 2 the plural expression ―the
things above‖ (ta; a[nw) replaces it. This phrase (a substantive use, cf. Robertson, Grammar,
547, Turner, Syntax, 14) does not occur elsewhere in the Pauline letters though reference is
made to ―the Jerusalem which is above‖ (hJ a[nw ÆIierousalhvm, Gal 4:26) and the ―upward
call‖ (a[nw klh`si", Phil 3:14). The spatial contrast is not a metaphysical one—as though
God and Christ belong to the upper realm but have nothing to do with the lower which is
evil because it is physical and material. Paul elsewhere uses the term gh` (―earth‖) and
ejpivgeio" (―earthly‖) without strong negative overtones (cf. 1 Cor 15:47; 2 Cor 5:1, 2; Phil
2:10) but in Colossians 3:2, 5, as in Philippians 3:19 the contast between heaven and earth
is ethically orientated with the earth being regarded as the special theater of sin (in the light
of Gen 3:17, ―cursed is the ground‖ [ejpikatavrato" hJ gh`], it is understandable that the
earth should be regarded as the primary setting of fallen creation; cf. Lincoln, Dimension,
204–207, who further claims that Paul‘s opponents were positively obsessed with ―the
things above,‖ and the apostle by using this term outclasses his opponents on their own
ground, not completely disparaging their concern with the heavenly realm but rather
redirecting it, at the same time exposing its false premises about contacting this realm
through legalistic external observances and the like; Paul turns the tables on his opponents
―by taking over spatial terminology in order to point to the exclusiveness and completeness
of Christ.… For Paul there could be no going beyond the one in the supreme position in
heaven at God‘s right hand‖ [206]).
     The OT itself had already used spatial terminology of heaven and earth, ascending and
descending, etc (cf. Gen 11:5; Exod 19:20; 24:9, 10; Ps 14:2; Ezek 1:26; Dan 7:13), while
the notion of an upper world was common in apocalyptic and Hellenistic Judaism (cf.
Schweizer, 103). In rabbinic Judaism the contast between the two ages (―the present age‖
and ―the coming age‖) is paralleled by the notion of the lower and upper worlds (cf. .
2.1, ―My fathers gathered treasures for below, I gathered treasures for above … my fathers
gathered treasures in this world, and I gathered treasures for the future world,‖ Str-B 1, 395,
977; cf. 2, 116, 133, 430, 431), and in the Qumran literature the predominantly ethical
contrast between light and darkness had similar spatial connotations between the upper and
lower realms (cf. Lincoln, Dimension, 201). Paul is thus employing spatial categories in a
qualitative manner (Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 149) to describe two spheres which
correspond to the eschatological schema of the two ages. Here ta; a[nw stands for the
heavenly world and the new aeon. It has to do with what is ultimately essential,
transcendent and belonging to God (Moule, 111) and although ―seeking the things above‖
has a definite ethical significance (as the apostle makes plain later) ta; a[nw is not to be
defined solely with reference to ethical categories. The Colossian Christians have already
participated in the world to come, the powers of the new age have broken in upon them,
they already participate in the resurrection life of Christ. Thus their aims, ambitions, indeed
their whole orientation is to be directed to this sphere.
ou\ oJ Cristov" ejstin ejn dexiva/ tou` qeou` kaqhvmeno". The basic reason for seeking the
heavenly realm is that this is ―where Christ is.‖ Grammatically this clause spells out the
place and character of a[nw (―above,‖ cf. Schweizer, 132), but it also provides the ground
and motivation for the Christians seeking the things above (von Soden, 58). Paul is not
indicating an interest in some cosmic geography, nor is he encouraging the pursuit of ―that
which is above‖ for its own sake. The significance of this realm, closely related to the
sphere of resurrection existence, is that the exalted Christ is at its center.
    The phrase ejn dexiea/ tou` qeou` kaqhvmeno" (―seated at God‘s right hand‖; with most
commentators ejstin, ―is,‖ should not be connected with kaqhvmeno" ―seated,‖ so making a
periphrastic tense, but separated from the participle by a comma; there are two dependent
clauses, cf. 2:3 and the similar comment regarding eijsin … ajpovkrufoi) is an allusion to
Psalm 110:1. Paul takes up the Christological interpretation of this psalm, which was
common in the early church, to speak of Christ‘s session at God‘s right hand and so to
define further the realm above which is to be the goal of the Colossians‘ striving (cf. J.
Daniélou, ―La Session à la droite du Pàre,‖ Studia Evangelica. ed. K. Aland and others [TU
73; Berlin: Akademie, 1959] 689–98, D. M. Hay, Glory at the Right Hand. Psalm 110 in
Early Christianity [SBLMS 18; Nashville: Abingdon, 1973], M. Gourges. A la droite de
Dieu [Paris: Gabalda, 1978] 57–63, and W. R. G. Loader, ―Christ at the right hand—Ps. cx.
1 in the New Testament,‖ NTS 24 [1977–78] 199–217).
    Christ‘s ascension to the right hand of God was an essential and regular element in the
early apostolic preaching, finding echoes throughout the NT (Acts 2:33–35; 5:31; 7:55, 56;
Rom 8:34; Eph 1:20; Heb 1:3, 13; 8:1; 10:12; 12:2; 1 Pet 3:22; Rev. 3:21). This goes back
to the messianic interpretation of Psalm 110:1: ―The Lord says to my Lord: ‗Sit at my right
hand, till I make your enemies your footstool.‘ ‖ Jesus claimed these words for himself
when he was brought before the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem (Matt 26:64; Mark 12:36; Luke
20:41–44). After his resurrection and ascension the apostolic announcement was that this
enthronement had taken place. Christ ruled from the right hand of God and would continue
to do so until all his enemies had submitted to him (1 Cor 15:25).
According to Hay (Glory, 15) some thirty-three quotations of or allusions to Psalm 110 (vv
1 and 4) are scattered throughout the NT (seven more may be found in other Christian
writings produced before the middle of the second century). These occur in contexts: (a)
that point to Jesus or Christians being seated at the right hand of God (Rom 8:34; Eph 1:20;
2:6; Col 3:1; Mark 14:62; Matt 26:64; Luke 22:69; Acts 2:33–35; 5:31; 1 Pet 3:22; Rev
3:21; Heb 1:3, 13; 8:1; 10:12; 12:2), (b) where Psalm 110:1 is used in support of
Christological titles such as ―Lord‖ (Acts 2:33–36; Mark 16:19), ―Son of Man‖ (Mark
14:62; Matt 26:64; Luke 22:69; Acts 7:56; cf. Barn 12:10, 11), ―Son of God‖ (Heb 1:3, 13;
cf. 1 Cor 15:25, 28; 1 Clem 36:4) and ―Son of David‖ (Mark 12:35–37; Matt 22:41–45;
Luke 20:41–44; cf. Barn 12:10, 11), (c) where affirmations are made about the subjection of
the powers to Christ (1 Cor 15:25; Eph 1:20; Heb 10:12, 13; 1 Peter 3:22; Rev 3:21; cf. l
Clem 36:5, 6; Pol Phil 2:1; Apoc Pet 6), and (d) where statements are made in connection
with Jesus‘ intercession and priestly office (Rom 8:34; cf. Heb 7:25 and possibly 1 Pet
3:22). Colossians 3:1, which is an allusion to Psalm 110:1 rather than a quotation, does not
stress the movement of the exalted one (cf. Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht, 85; in Acts
2:33–36; 5:31 the references in Hebrews, and Rev 3:21 the interest is concentrated on the
past moment of exaltation, though each passage assumes the continuance of the exaltation
into the present and the future, so Hay, Glory, 90). Instead, the accent falls on the present
fact of his exaltation (the participle kaqhvmeno", ―seated,‖ as distinct from the imperative or
finite verb, describes a state or condition; Christ is, according to Steinmetz,
Heils-Zuversicht, 85, the ―constantly exalted one‖).
     The apostles were aware that they were using figurative language when they spoke of
Christ‘s exaltation to the right hand of God. They no more thought of a literal throne at the
literal right hand of God than we do. Ancient Jews and Gentiles alike commonly regarded
the right side and a position at the right hand side as symbolic of honor or good fortune
(Hay, Glory, 90, cf. 52–58). When the psalm was employed by early Christian writers it
was to ―articulate the supreme glory, the divine transcendence, of Jesus through whom
salvation was mediated‖ (Hay, Glory, 155). At Colossians 3:1 the phrase alluded to in the
psalm, ―seated at the right hand of God‖ (ejn dexiva/ tou` qeou` kaqhvmeno") points to the
centrality and supremacy of Christ in the heavenly realm. Or to put it another way the
apostle alludes to the psalm in order to describe the realm above in terms of the exalted
Christ. This heavenly realm centers around the one with whom they have been raised. Since
he is in a position of supreme authority no principality or power can prevent their access to
this realm and to God‘s presence. They are thus to keep on aiming at that which is above
and him who is at its center.
2. ta; a[nw fronei`te, uh; ta; ejpi; th`" gh`". In the light of Christ‘s heavenly supremacy
Paul repeats his summons: ―Consider that which is above, not that which is on earth.‖ Here
the verb is different (fronti`te in place of zhtei`te, v 1) and the exhortation is heightened
by the contrast uh; ta; ejpi; th`" gh`" (―not that which is on earth‖; so Lincoln, Dimension,
203). fronevw (one of several words derived from the stem frhn-) appears no fewer than
twenty-three times in Paul out of a total of twenty-six occurrences in the NT. As a rather
neutral term it acquires its proper meaning from its immediate context and covers a range
such as to ―think,‖ ―judge,‖ and ―give one‘s mind to‖ (cf. Goetzmann, in NIDNTT 2, 616).
However, several of the Pauline contexts (e.g. Rom 8:5–8 where the cognate frovnhma
[―way of thinking,‖ ―aim‖] also occurs) make it plain that the way one thinks is intimately
related to the way one lives (whether as a Christian in the Spirit and by faith, or in the flesh,
in sin and in spiritual death). ―A man‘s thinking and striving cannot be seen in isolation
from the overall direction of his life; the latter will be reflected in the aims which he sets
himself‖ (Goetzmann, in NIDNTT 2, 617).fronevw thus expresses not simply an activity of
the intellect, but also a movement of the will; it has to do with aims and the motives
underlying them. So in addition to the range of meanings mentioned above, to ―set one‘s
mind on,‖ ―be intent on,‖ and ―be minded or disposed‖ (cf. BAG, 866) must also be included
(the AV/KJV rendering ―set your affection‖ is misleading today since it gives the impression
the verb primarily has to do with a person‘s emotional state). The apostle exhorts the
Roman Christians not to consider themselves too highly but to think with sober judgment
and in accordance with the measure of faith God has given them (Rom 12:3, note the
fourfold use of fronevw words: uJperfronevw, ―be haughty,‖ ―consider oneself too highly,‖
swfronevw, ―be sensible or reasonable,‖ ―keep one‘s head,‖ and fronevw twice); elsewhere
he admonishes his readers to ―be of the same mind‖ (Rom 12:16; 15:5; 2 Cor 13:11; Phil
2:2; 4:2; cf. Gal 5:10; Phil 3:15), an injunction that is not intended to squash independent
thinking by Christians or to prevent them from having different opinions on secondary
matters, but is to exhort them to be at one in basic aim, direction and orientation of their
behavior. If the AV/KJV rendering of Philippians 2:5 expresses the correct interpretation of
this disputed passage (―Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus‖; Martin,
Carmen Christi, 290, 291, etc, following Käsemann, prefers a ―kerygmatic‖ interpretation
to an exemplary one; for a restatement and endorsement of the latter view, that is the
―ethical‖ interpretation, see C. F. D. Moule, ―Further Reflexions on Philippians 2:5–11,‖
Apostolic History and the Gospel. Biblical and Historical Essays Presented to F. F. Bruce,
ed. W. W. Gasque and R. P. Martin [Exeter: Paternoster, 1970] 264–76, especially 269,
270, American edition [Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1970]; cf. I. H. Marshall, ―The
Christ-Hymn in Philippians 2:5–11,‖ TB 19 [1968] 104–127, and M. D. Hooker,
―Philippians 2:6–11.‖ Jesus und Paulus. Festschrift für Werner Georg Kümmel zum 70.
Geburtstag. 2nd ed., ed. E. E. Ellis and E. Grässer[Göttingen: Vandenhoeck undRuprecht,
1978] 151–64) then Christ‘s self-abasement is the model for a similar attitude by
Christians, while Romans 12:2 (cf. v 3) suggests that this considering is accompanied by
the ―renewal of the mind‖ (ajnakaivnwsi" tou` nou`", cf. Lohse,133). fronei`te at
Colossians 3:2 is an admonition to be heavenly minded instead of earthly minded. Like its
previous counterpart zhtei`te (―seek‖; Meyer, 418, 419, has argued with some justification
that fronei`te is more comprehensive than zhtei`te, expressing not only the striving but
also the whole bent of thought and disposition) it is addressed to the whole congregation.
Obedience to the injunction requires that great effort be made. The overtones of sober
consideration and firm purpose may also be present, perhaps over against visionary
experiences of heavenly mysteries.
     The sharp contrast between ―that which is above‖ (ta; a[nw) and ―that which is on earth‖
(ta; ejpi; th`" gh`"; it has been argued that the latter expression preceded by the negative mhv,
―not,‖ defines more precisely the former phrase, Lohse, 133) is given a strong ethical
content, as the following section (i.e. vv 5–7) makes plain. Schweizer (133; cf. Lincoln,
Dimension, 203), who argues that the ―above‖ and ―on the earth‖ are not properly
topographical definitions but rather signify spheres in which a person may live (note Phil
3:19 where Paul accuses his opponents of having their ―minds set on earthly things [oiJ ta;
ejpivgeia fronou`nte"]‖ and of making a god out of their belly, in contrast to those whose
citizenship is in heaven [polivteuma ejn oujranoi`"]), rightly claims that this contrast closely
resembles that which Paul describes elsewhere as the spheres of the ―flesh‖ and the
―Spirit.‖ At Romans 8:5, 6, using both fronevw and the cognate frovnhma (―way of
thinking,‖ ―mind[= set],‖ though here = ―aim,‖ ―aspiration,‖ ―striving,‖ so BAG, 866), a
similar sharp antithesis in categories of ―flesh‖ and ―Spirit‖ is presented: ―Those who live
according to their sinful nature have their minds set on what that nature desires (ta; th`"
sarko;" fronou`sin); but those who live in accordance with the Spirit have their minds set
on what the Spirit desires (ta; tou` pneuvmato" [fronou`sin]). The mind of sinful man is
death, but the mind controlled by the Spirit is life and peace‖ (NIV). Paul does not repudiate
living ―in the flesh‖ when he means living ―in the body,‖ that is, as a human being on earth.
As such, flesh is part of God‘s good creation. Rather, he rejects the orientation of life
toward the flesh, that old order to which the Christian no longer belongs.
     3. ajpeqavnete ga;r kai; hJ zwh; uJnw`n kevkruptai ktl. The grounds for (gavr; it does not
simply mean ―in effect,‖ so Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 147, following Hugedé 162)
Paul‘s admonition to consider the things above, not those on earth, are twofold: (1) you
died to that old order, and (2) your new life is hidden with Christ in God. ajpeqavnete
should be rendered ―you died‖ for it points back to the specific occasion of their union with
Christ in his death (rather than ―you have died,‖ RSV or ―you are dead‖); it picks up the
statement of chapter 2:20, ―you died (ajpeqavnete) with Christ from the elemental spirits of
the universe‖ and harks back to the ideas expressed in chapter 2:11, 12, ―you were
circumcised … in the circumcision of Christ … you were buried with him,‖ at the same
time providing the basis for the imperative in the exhortatory section, ―put to death‖ (3:5).
This death with Christ involves a dying to the elemental spirits and by implication to what
has been designated ta; ejpi; th`" gh`" (―the things on earth‖), the content of which is
spelled out, in part at least, in chapter 2:16–23 with its references to ascetic regulations,
visionary experiences and the like.
But the Colossians are exhorted to think on the things of heaven not only because they died
with Christ to the old order, but also (kaiv) because they have been raised with him and
participate in his resurrection life. The apostle frequently used the terms ―life‖ (zwhv) and to
―live‖ (zavw: cf. zwopoievw, to ―make alive,‖ ―give life to‖) to describe the life of the age to
come which will be received on the final day and which through the resurrection of Christ
from the dead has become for the believer a present reality (zwhv: Rom 6:4, 22, 23; 8:2, 6,
10; 2 Cor 4:10, 11, etc; zavw: Rom 1:17; 6:11, 13; 8:13; 2 Cor 13:4; Gal 2:19, 20, etc; cf.
zwopoievw: Rom 8:11). Here at Colossians 3:3, 4 both present and future aspects are linked:
at verse 3 the life (described as the believer‘s own life, hJ zwh; uJmw`n) is already present,
bound up with Christ, though in a hidden way (cf. Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht, 30); at verse
4 the future note is struck when it is asserted that this life (which is so closely related to
Christ that he himself can be called the believer‘s life, hJ zwh; hJmw`n [see notes]) will be
manifested for what it really is at the Second Coming (Grässer, ZTK 64 [1967] 161, 162,
considers the reference is exclusively to future life, but apart from the fact that v 3 speaks
of its present existence, albeit in a hidden way, the assertion at 2:13 that God had already
made the Colossians alive with Christ, together with the statements of their having been
raised with him in the past [2:12; 3:1], shows that the apostle has a present aspect in view
as well as a future manifestation; cf. Bultmann, TDNT 2, 861–75).


    kevkruptai su;n tw`/ Cristw`/ ejn tw`/ qew`/. The verb kevkruptai (―hidden‖) is a perfect
tense, in contrast to the preceding aorist, ajpeqajnete (―you died,‖ drawing attention to the
specific occasion of their death with Christ), and stresses the ongoing and permanent
effects: your life has been hidden with Christ in God and it remains that way. This is
sometimes taken to mean that the new life of Christians in Christ is a secret to the
unconverted (and in part even to themselves; note Bengel‘s oft-quoted statement: ―The
world knows neither Christ nor Christians, and Christians do not even fully know
themselves,‖ 2, 467) so that it remains unrevealed until the end. Moule, 112, raises the
question as to whether some connection with the ajpovkruioi (―stored up‖) of chapter 2:3 is
in view. Christ is the storehouse of all God‘s secrets including the believer‘s new life. He is
―above‖ and since the Christian‘s life is hidden with him then it is already in heaven (as
Tannehill, Dying, 48, rightly comments: ―the life of the believer is already a heavenly life‖;
cf. Mussner, Christus, 93, who notes that since this life is inseparable from the person of the
Exalted One then it belongs to the transcendent realm). Ephesians 2:6, by asserting
explicitly that Christians have been seated with Christ in the heavenlies, simply brings out
what has already been implied here in Colossians 3:3, 4 (cf. A. T. Lincoln, ―A
Re-Examination of ‗The Heavenlies‘ in Ephesians,‖ NTS 19 [1972–73] 473, 474).
(Regarding the choice of this verb kevkruptai some have suggested there may be an
allusion to the pagan idea that death indicates a man is ―hidden‖ in the earth—dead and
gone; Christians claim that they are hidden indeed, but in Christ, cf. Moule, 112, and
Schweizer, 133; others have thought the term may have been called forth by a desire on the
part of the proponents of the false teaching to refer to the notion of hiddenness, for a secret
knowledge belonging only to the initiated, cf. 1:26, 27; 2:2, 3; so Lincoln, Dimension, 208,
209.)
     The believer‘s life is said to be hidden su;n tw`/ Cristw`/ ejn tw` uew`/ (―with Christ in
God‖). The expression ―in God,‖ the very antithesis to what is material and visible, is used
rather rarely by Paul and the only precise parallels to the believers being ―in God‖ are 1
Thessalonians 1:1 and 2 Thessalonians 1:1 (at Rom 2:17; 5:11 it is the rejoicing
[kaucavomai] in God which is in view; cf. 1 Thess 2:2 and Eph 3:9). The phrase ―in God‖
modifies both ―life‖ (zwhv) and the immediately preceding words ―with Christ‖ (su;n tw`/
Cristw`/; elsewhere in the Pauline letters this phrase [using the preposition by itself; it is
different with verbs compounded with suvn] occurs only of future existence, cf. Moule,
RevExp 70 [1973] 485; on the meaning of this expression see the following note): our life is
hidden with Christ because we died with him and have been raised with him to new life; ―in
God‖ because Christ himself has his being in God and those who belong to Christ have
their being there too (cf. Bruce, 261; Grundmann, TDNT 7, 785). Centered in God means
that the hidden life is secure, unable to be touched by anyone.
     4. Our heavenly life will be fully manifest in all its glory when Christ who embodies it
appears at his Parousia. We too who share his life will share his glorious epiphany. What is
now secretly present shall be revealed when Christ shall appear.
o{tan oJ Cristo;" fanerwqh`/, hJ zwh; hJmw`n. Paul‘s statement is striking and vivid. He does
not insert any conjunction such as kaiv (―and‖) or dev (―but‖), with the result that the very
abruptness of the expression helps to underline the assurance of the hope more vividly
(Williams, 124; cf. Abbott, 249, Bengel 2, 467, and Meyer, 422). The temporal note is
struck (cf. the balancing of the two clauses o{tan .… tovte, ―when .… then‖) in a context
where spatial categories have been employed, and the significance of this chronological
assertion is not to be watered down as some have suggested (see below 168, 169;
Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht, 30, wrongly considers that the time note is not strong in o{tan,
but he fails to give the balancing tovte, where there is a stress on future consummation, its
due weight).
     For the fourth time in as many verses the name ―Christ‖ (oJ Cristov") appears (cf. v 2,
tw`/ Cristw`/, oJ Cristov"; v 3 tw`/ Cristw`/). The pronoun ―he‖ (or ―him‖) would have been
more natural but less emphatic (so Lightfoot, 208; cf. Williams, 124) as Paul goes out of his
way to emphasize that true Christian existence is found ―with Christ‖ alone. The verb
fanerovw (―reveal,‖ ―make known,‖ ―show,‖ BAG, 852, 853; cf. Bultmann/Lührmann, TDNT
9, 3–6) which the apostle often employs synonymously with ajpokaluvptw (―reveal‖; cf.
Rom 1:17 and 3:21 on the revelation of God‘s righteousness in Christ, and Eph 3:5 with
Col 1:26 on the revelation of the mystery hidden for ages), does not speak of a
manifestation that has already taken place as in chapter 1:26 (against Brown, in NIDNT T 3,
322), but refers rather to the Parousia when the veil will be drawn back so that what is
hidden from our eyes will shine in bright light (Lohse, 134). This term often denotes in
Paul the revelation that takes place in the proclamation of the gospel or the mystery (Rom
3:21; 16:26; 2 Cor 2:14; 11:6; Col 1:26; cf. 4:4). Here, however, it has to do with the future
manifestation of Christ himself (cf. 1 John 2:28; 3:2) and of believers (fanerwqhvsesqe) on
the final day (cf. 1 Cor 4:5 with reference to the future judgment where fanerovw points to
the making known of what is currently hidden) in contrast to the present hiddenness
(kevkruptai and                                  stand in sharp contrast to each other, as both
their meanings, ―hide,‖ ―make known,‖ and tenses indicate).
So closely is the cause of Christ identified with that of his people that he is said to be their
life (oJ Cristov" … hJ zwh; hJmw`n). The words mark a twofold development on the previous
statement (cf. Lightfoot, 208): first, it is not simply that the life is said to be shared with
Christ: ―the life is Christ.‖ Second, if the reading ―our life‖ (hJ zwh; hJmw`n) is original (see
the note above 157), then the apostle has gone out of his way to include himself and other
believers among the recipients of this mighty blessing. When writing to the Philippians he
could say, ―For to me to live is Christ‖ (Phil 1:21; cf. Rom 8:2, 10; 2 Cor 4:10; Gal 2:19,
20). But he did not regard this as true only of himself. Christ is the life of all who are united
to him by faith, who are members of his body. Whoever belongs to him has passed from
death to life, to use Johannine language (John 5:24, 25; 11:25, 26; cf. 1 John 5:12).
     tovte kai; uJmei`" su;n aujtw`/ fanerwqhvsesqe ejn dovxh/. Christ is now enthroned in
heaven at God‘s right hand. When he appears at the end of days at the Parousia, it will
become plain that his own are with him. The day of the revelation of the Son of God will be
the day of the revelation of the sons of God (the position of su;n aujtw`/ lays stress on the
closeness of the relation of ―you‖ and ―him,‖ as well as keeping ejn dovxh/ in a position of
final emphasis, so Williams, 124), as Paul makes plain with his ―then‖ (tovte which is
emphatic pointing to the same time or occasion specified in the o{tan clause, i.e. when
Christ is revealed), the additional words ―you also‖ (kai; uJmei`") and his selection of the
same verb ―reveal‖ (fanerovw) to apply to the believers themselves as well as to Christ.
That manifestation will take place ―in glory‖ (ejn dovxh/). ―Glory‖ was a characteristic theme
in apocalyptic thought where it was closely associated with heavenly existence as it is also
in Paul‘s writings. The future manifestation in glory predicted here for the believer has
particular reference to his sharing Christ‘s likeness (cf. 1 John 3:2, ―we know that when he
appears, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is‖), and to receiving the glorious
resurrection body. It was this same hope to which the apostle directed the Philippians‘
attention: ―Our citizenship is in heaven. And we eagerly await a Savior from there, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who, by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control, will
transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body (sw`ma th`" dovxh"
aujtou`)‖ (Phil 3:20, 21 NIV; cf. 1 Cor 15:42, 43; 2 Cor 5:1, 2).
It has been argued that this is the only explicit futuristic eschatological reference in
Colossians (there are hints at and 4:11) and that this use of the ―hidden—revealed‖ motif is
without parallel in the earlier Pauline letters. Spatial concepts are said to dominate at
chapters 1:26, 27; 3:3, 4, while none of the typically Pauline eschatological
ideas—Parousia, resurrection of the dead, judgment of the world—is encountered in
Colossians. It is further alleged that in chapter 1:5, 23 and 27 ―hope‖ is no longer
chronologically conceived but has become an otherworldly quality of hope (cf. especially
Bornkamm, Geschichte und Glaube 2, 206–213).Grässer (ZTK 64 [1967] 165) considers that
Paul‘s dialectic of eschatological existence has been replaced by a dialectic of transcendent
existence. No longer does the author, like Paul, speak in the language of apocalyptic about
a resurrection of the dead but instead refers to ―life‖ as the eschatological gift (ZTK 64
[1967] 161). Further, to assert that someone has been raised with Christ, of necessity means
there can be no future resurrection. Meanwhile Lohse, while not endorsing all of the
above-mentioned arguments, regards the changed eschatology of Colossians as one of the
reasons for his decision against Pauline authorship. Eschatology has receded into the
background. In Colossians the basis for exhortation is baptism, while eschatological themes
provide the motivation in Paul (Lohse, 180).
    By way of response we have already noted that there is an emphasis on realized
eschatology in Colossians. In terms of the Pauline ―already—not yet‖ tension the accent
falls upon the former, called forth no doubt by the particular circumstances of the letter (see
xxx–xli, 120). But this is not to suggest that the ―not yet‖ pole in Paul‘s tension is absent.
There is future eschatology at chapter 3:4 and 6 (a reference to the future eschatological
wrath of God), 24 (where the reception of a future inheritance is in view) and in our
estimation at chapter 1:22 and 28 where the presentation of every man as perfect at the
Parousia is in mind (see above, 68, 69, 89, 90; Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht, 31, 32, notes
traces of future eschatology in 4:11 also). The ―hidden—revealed‖ motif and the concept of
glory (note ejn dovxh/ at v 4) are both significant apocalyptic features (cf. 1:26, 27 where the
―hidden—revealed‖ theme is used of the mystery that has now been made known), while
spatial concepts (―above,‖ ―on earth‖) are used in the service of eschatology. To speak of a
heavenly realm was meaningful in a Hellenistic syncretistic environment while categories
such as this were already at hand in the thought world of Jewish apocalyptic. Paul had
previously employed such motifs in his earlier letters and they are used in Colossians to
draw attention to the two ages: ―this age‖ and ―the age to come‖ (cf. Zeilinger, Der
Erstgeborene, 149). Grässer‘s antithesis (ZTK 64 [1967] 165) between eschatological and
transcendent perspectives is a false one since both are found together in the undisputed
Paulines and at Colossians 3:1–4. Further, the apocalyptic notion of a resurrection from the
dead is found at chapter 1:18 in the title ascribed to Christ, ―firstborn from the dead‖
(prwtovtoko" ejk tw`n nekrw`n, cf. 1 Cor 15:20), and even if the author is taking over
traditional material (for the various arguments see 40–42) it is clear that he is giving the
terminology his approval. Verse 18 can only be adequately understood of Christ‘s primacy
in resurrection (see the detailed exegesis 50, 51). In the undisputed Paulines the notions of
the resurrection from the dead and eschatological life are interchangeable (so Rom 4:17;
5:17, 18, 21; 6:22, 23; 8:11; 1 Cor 15:45), and Grässer‘s remark (ZTK 64 [1967] 161) that
whoever has been raised with Christ will not participate in a future resurrection shows he
fails to come to grips with the ―already—not yet‖ tension.
Against Lohse it may be argued that there is an eschatological motivation in Colossians; it
may not be the dominant one but it is present nevertheless. The exhortation, ―put to death,
therefore, …‖ (nekrwvsate ou\n, 3:5), is based on verses 1–4 (not simply v 3) and the last of
these has an eschatological emphasis (compare 3:6; 2:4; and 4:5). At the same time there
are other grounds for exhortation in the generally accepted Pauline letters. The question is
simply one of emphasis. There was good reason for Paul stressing what God had done in
uniting the readers with his Son (the aspect of realized eschatology or the ―already‖ of the
tension) as the basis for ethical exhortation in Colossians. ―Against those who were
removing the basis of Christian living away from grace and toward legalistic observances,
knowledge, visionary experiences, Paul insists that God has already done everything
necessary in Christ‖ (Lincoln, Dimension, 217; note his careful analysis on 212–17; for a
critique of Bornkamm‘s understanding of ―hope‖ in Colossians see above xlvi, 11, and
regarding the arguments against the Pauline authorship of the letter because of the realized
eschatological emphasis see xlvi–xlvii).

A Note on the Expression ―With Christ‖
The phrase ―with Christ‖ (su;n Cristw`/) occurs in the Pauline letters far less frequently
than the formula ―in Christ‖ (ejn Cristw`/), appearing on only twelve occasions (four of
which are in Colossians: 2:13, 20; 3:3, 4). The expression ―to be with Christ‖ (su;n Cristw`/
ei\nai) turns up once at Philippians 1:23, though related statements do appear: ―we shall be
with the Lord‖ (su;n kuriw/ ejsovmeqa, 1 Thess 4:17), and ―we shall live together with him‖
(su;n aujtw`/ zhvswmen, 5:10). Apart from the references in Colossians, five further
expressions using different verbs are to be found: ―he [God] will bring with him [Jesus]‖
(su;n aujtw`/, 1 Thess 4:14), ―he will raise us with Jesus‖ (su;n ÆIhsou`, 2 Cor 4:14), ―we will
live with him‖ (su;n aujtw`/, 13:4), ―since we died with Christ‖ (su;n Cristw`/, Rom 6:8),
―how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?‖ (su;n aujtw`/, 8:32). A
brief glance at these references shows that no single expression completely agrees with any
other, but that the preposition suvn (―with‖) was suited to express intimate personal union
with Christ, the Lord, Jesus or him in various contexts (rather than metav, ―with,‖ which
was more suited to indicate close association or attendant circumstances, e.g. 1 Thess 3:13;
cf. Harris, in NIDNTT 3, 1206, 1207). Because of this variety several have argued it is
incorrect to speak of ―with Christ‖ (su;n Cristw`/) as a formula. Rather it is a motif or theme
which can be expressed in a number of different ways (so Tannehill, Dying, 87, 88, Lohse,
104, 105; cf. J. Gnilka, Der Philipperbrief [HTKNT 10/3; Freiburg: Herder, 1968] 76,
against Grundmann, TDNT 7, 782).
    In addition to these prepositional phrases Paul employs a number of words compounded
with su;n (―with‖) which describe the believer‘s close union with Christ, the most important
of which are: sustaurovw (―crucify together with,‖ Rom 6:6; Gal 2:20), sunqavptw (―bury
with,‖ Rom 6:4; Col 2:12), suvmyuto" (an adjective meaning ―grown together,‖ deriving
from sumyuvomai, Rom 6:5), suzavw (―live together with,‖ Rom 6:8; 2 Tim 2:11),
sugalhronovmo" (―co-heir,‖ Rom 8:17; cf. Heb 11:9; 1 Pet 3:7), sumpavscw (―suffer with,‖
Rom 8:17), sundoxavzw (―glorify with,‖ Rom 8:17), suvmmoryo" (―having the same form
as,‖ Rom 8:29; Phil 3:21) and summoryivzw (―confer the same form,‖ Phil 3:10). For full
details see Grundmann, TDNT 7, 786, 787.
    To be with Christ or with the Lord (Phil 1:23; 1 Thess 4:17) refers to the future and
signifies the perfection which is to come (Dupont, SUN CRISTWI, 39–47, etc, has
distinguished two phases: ―being or living with the Lord‖ [1 Thess 4:17; 5:10] emphasizes
believers‘ sharing in the eschatological blessings of the kingdom enjoyed by Christ since
his resurrection, while in Phil 1:23 [―being with Christ‖] and 2 Cor 5:8 [―dwelling with the
Lord‖] the emphasis falls on intimate fellowship with the King in his kingdom [cf. Harris,
in NIDNTT 3, 1207]). However, by means of some of the compound words the apostle
points out that this intimate personal union with Christ is already a present reality (on the
relationship of the statements [―with Christ,‖ ―with the Lord,‖ etc] that point to the future
and those speaking about the present, particularly in the light of possible backgrounds to
the notion, see Schnackenburg, Baptism, 170–77, and the literature cited by Lohse, 104,
note 76). The believer has already been united with Christ in his death and resurrection. So
according to Romans 6 we were ―buried with him‖ (v 4), ―united with him in his death‖ (v
5), and ―our old self was crucified with him‖ (v 6). Verse 8 asserts ―we will live with him,‖
while later in the same letter Paul speaks about a union with Christ that comes to be known
through suffering, but which the Christian endures in view of the future glory: ―if indeed
we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory‖ (ei[per
sumpavscomen i{na kai; sundoxasqw`men, 8:17).
In Colossians Paul frequently uses the phrase ―with Christ.‖ As we have noted elsewhere,
consistent with the emphasis on realized eschatology, this expression ―with Christ‖—the
―already‖ of salvation speaks of the union with Christ in his death and resurrection which
has already occurred. So the readers were buried with Christ in baptism (suntafevnte"
aujtw`/, 2:12), and were made alive together with Christ (sunezwopoivhsen su;n aujtw`/, 2:13);
they died with him to the elemental spirits of the universe (ajpeqavnete su;n Cristw`/, 2:20),
were raised with him (sunhgevrqhte, 3:1) and as a result their life is hidden with him in
God (kevkruptai su;n tw`/ Cristw`/, 3:3). On the other hand, the future note is not
completely absent. The ―not yet‖ of salvation is in view at chapter 3:4 where it is stated:
―When Christ, who is our life, appears, then you also will appear with him (su;n aujtw`/
fanerwuhvsesqe) in glory.‖
     The phrase ―with Christ‖ is not a formula like the expression ―in Christ,‖ but is a motif
used in a variety of ways to express the intimate personal union of the believer with Christ.
The expression ―to be with Christ‖ (Phil 1:23) or its equivalents (1 Thess 4:17; 2 Cor 4:14;
13:4) looks forward to the future when the destiny of Christians, after death or after the
Parousia, is in view. When the preposition suvn (―with‖) is compounded with certain verbs
it relates to past events and resulting present experiences so that this close union with Christ
is already a present reality. Both the phrase and related verbs are employed in Colossians to
describe the death and resurrection with Christ as a past event and the resulting new
existence for the Christian: it is his life with Christ. Like Christ‘s life it is hidden in God.
What Christians await is the appearance of Christ, that is, his emergence from concealment
and their own manifestation with him (su;n aujtw`/, 3:4) in glory. It is not called the
resurrection of the dead, but the manifestation of the hidden life (Grundmann, TDNT 7, 785,
786).

Explanation
    This short paragraph, in which the apostle exhorts the Colossians to pursue those things
that belong to the heavenly realm where Christ reigns, occupies an important pivotal
position in the letter (cf. the similar function of 2:6, 7). Containing both indicatives and
imperatives it concludes the section where Paul attacks the ―philosophy‖ of the false
teachers, providing the true alternative to the erroneous teaching. It is possible that the
positive expressions set forth in chapter 3:1–4 show the controversy is still in view as Paul
draws together themes previously mentioned (2:11–13, 20). At the same time the
theological foundations (the ―indicative‖) for the admonitions (the ―imperative‖) that
follow (3:5–4:6) are set forth.
    The grounds for Paul‘s admonition to aim at the things above, not those on earth, are
twofold (v 1, 3): first, the Colossians died to that old order with its elemental spirits (2:20),
its ascetic and enslaving regulations, visionary experiences and useless will-worship.
Second, as those who have already been raised with Christ they now participate in his
resurrection life. So their lives are to be different. Their interests are to be centered on
Christ; their minds, aims, ambitions, in fact their whole outlook, are to be centered on that
heavenly realm where he reigns and where their lives truly belong. The continuous ongoing
effort required for such a cast of mind does not come automatically. That realm above is to
be sought diligently (and in contrast to any false seeking of heavenly experiences by the
advocates of the Colossian ―philosophy‖) for this is where Christ is, seated as king in the
place of honor.
For the moment their heavenly life remains hidden, secure with Christ in God. Their new
life as Christians in Christ is not visible to others and, in some measure, is hidden from
themselves. It will only be fully manifest when Christ, who embodies that life, appears at
his Parousia. Indeed, the day of the revelation of the Son of God will be the day of the
revelation of the sons of God. That manifestation will take place ―in glory‖ for it will
involve the sharing of Christ‘s likeness and the receiving of the glorious resurrection body.
    In Colossians, as we have already noted, there is an emphasis on realized eschatology.
Within the ―already—not yet‖ tension the stress falls upon the former, called forth by the
circumstances of the letter. The basis for seeking or setting the mind on the heavenly realm,
at the center of which is the exalted Christ, is God‘s mighty action in uniting the readers
with Christ in his death and resurrection. The ―already‖ of salvation needed to be asserted
repeatedly over against those who were interested in the heavenly realm but who had false
notions about it, believing it could be reached by legalistic observances, knowledge,
visionary experiences and the like. Ultimately the doctrine of grace was at stake. The
readers, therefore, needed to be instructed that they had died with Christ, been raised with
him and had been given new life with him. He had done all that was necessary. So they
were zealously to pursue the things of that new order, centered on the exalted Christ.
But if the ―already‖ pole received the emphasis, the ―not yet‖ of salvation still needed to be
mentioned, and here in verse 4 we find a clear future reference. Christ was currently hidden
from sight. So too were their lives, for they were hidden with him. The final day would
come when he would appear; and they would appear with him—they would be like him,
clothed with the resurrection body.




Put Away the Sins of the Past (3:5–11)
Bibliography
Bouttier, M. ―Complexio Oppositorum: sur les Formules de 1 Cor. xii. 13; Gal. iii. 26–8; Col. iii.
10, 11.‖ NTS 23 (1976–77) 1–19. Easton, B. S. ―New Testament Ethical Lists.‖ JBL 51 (1932) 1–12.
Jervell, J. Imago, 231–56. Kamlah, E. Die Form der katalogischen Paränese im Neuen Testament.
WUNT 7. Tübingen: Mohr, 1964. Larsson, E. Christus, 188–223. Merk, O. Handeln, 204–212.
Moule, C. F. D. RevExp 70 (1973) 481–93. Schnackenburg, R. ―Der neue Mensch—Mitte
christlichen Weltverständnisses (Kol 3, 9–11).‖ Schriften zum Neuen Testament. Exegese in
Fortschritt und Wandel. Munich: Kösel, 1971, 392–413. Schrage, W. Einzelgebote. Schweizer, E.
―Die Sunde in den Gliedern.‖ Abraham Unser Vater. Juden und Christen im Gespräch über die
Bibel. Festschrift für Otto Michel zum 60. Geburtstag, ed. O. Betz, M. Hengel and P. Schmidt.
AGSU 5. Leiden: Brill, 1963, 437–39. ———. ―Gottesgerechtigkeit und Lasterkataloge bei Paulus
(inkl. Kol und Eph).‖ Rechtfertigung. Festschrift für Ernst Käsemann zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. J.
Friedrich, W. Pöhlmann and P. Stuhlmacher. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1976, 461–77.
———. ―Traditional ethical patterns in the Pauline and post-Pauline letters and their development
(lists of vices and house-tables).‖ Text and Interpretation. Studies in the New Testament presented
to Matthew Black, ed. E. Best and R. McL. Wilson. Cambridge: University Press, 1979, 195–209.
Vögtle, A. Die Tugend- und Lasterkataloge im Neuen Testament, exegetisch, religions- und
formgeschichtlich untersucht. NTAbh 16. Münster: Aschendorff, 1936. Wibbing, S. Die Tugend-
und Lasterkataloge im Neuen Testament und ihre Traditionsgeschichte unter besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Qumrantexte. BZNW 25. Berlin: Töpelmann, 1959. Zeilinger, F. Der
Erstgeborene, 63–66, 151–60.

Translation
5
  Therefore put to death what belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity,
lust, evil desire and covetousness which is idolatry. 6Because of these things the wrath of
God is coming.a 7You too used to walk in these ways in the life you once lived. 8But now put
them all away: anger, rage, malice, slander and filthy language from your lips. 9Stop lying
to one another since you have put off the old man with his practices, 10and have put on the
new man which is being renewed in knowledge after the image of his creator. 11Here there
is no longer Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave
and free, but Christ is all and in all.

Notes
a. ejpi; tou;" uiJou;" th`" ajpeiqeiva". Although there is widespread and early testimony
supporting the longer reading which includes these words ―upon the sons of disobedience‖
(a
 A C D F
         etc, most miniscules, it vg copbo and several other versions) it is likely that they
represent an intrusion into the text from Ephesians 5:6, and were omitted by P46 B copsah and
several of the fathers. The phrase is a Hebraism, meaning ―disobedient people‖ and denotes
those whose lives are characterized by defiance of the law of God (contrast 1 Pet 1:14,
―children of obedience‖).

Form/Structure/Setting
    If the preceding paragraph (3:1–4) serves as an important transition piece in the letter,
functioning as the conclusion to Paul‘s polemic against the ―philosophy‖ of the false
teachers and presenting a true alternative to that teaching, then this paragraph begins the
lengthy paraenetic section of chapters 3:5–4:6. Four distinctive catchwords of early
Christian catechesis are found at the head of their respective paragraphs: ―put to death‖
(3:5–11; cf. also ―put off,‖ v 8); ―put on‖ (3:12–17); ―be subject‖ (3:18–4:1) and ―watch
and pray‖ (4:2–6).
    The first of these, verses 5–11, has been called the ―negative paraenesis‖ (Zeilinger,
Der Erstgeborene, 63) since it contains the injunctions nekrwvsate (―put to death,‖ v 5) and
ajpovqesqe (―put off,‖ v 8) together with two catalogs of vices (v 5, 8). The first injunction
with its ou\n (―therefore‖), nekrwvsate (―put to death‖) and ta; mevlh ta; ejpi; th`" gh`" (―the
members which are on earth‖) is designed to recall what has been previously written (see
the comment on v 5). As the particular objects of the imperative ―put to death‖ five vices
are listed (grammatically they are in apposition to ta; mevlh ta; ejpi; th`" gh`", ―[your]
earthly members‖):


v 5:
porneivan —ajkaqarsivan


pavqo" —ejpiqmivan


kai; th;n pleonexivan h{ti" ejsti;n eijdwlolatriva.

v 5:
sexual immorality —impurity


lust —evil desire


and covetousness which is idolatry.

    The last pleonexiva (―covetousness‖) is specially emphasized by the addition of kaiv
(―and‖; it is not used to separate the others in the list), the presence of the definite article
thvn (―the‖; the article does not appear before the other nouns) and the relative clause h{ti"
ejsti;n eijdwlolatriva (―which is idolatry‖). Three further relative clauses with verbs in the
indicative mood follow, and they describe the pagan past of the readers in relation to the
vices previously mentioned (vv 6, 7).
    By means of the ―once-now‖ antithesis (see on 1:21, 22 and 2:13) the Colossians are
shown how they ought to behave now in contrast to their past (vv 7, 8). This schematic
form is used to tie in the second catalog of vices with the first (the antecedent of ejn oi|", ―in
which,‖ v 7, is the first list of vices, v 5, while ta; pavnta, ―all,‖ v 8, is the object of the
second imperative and is defined more precisely by the second catalog). (On the chiastic
structure of the two sentences see below 186). Once again five sins are mentioned: they
stand in apposition to ta; pavnta, ―all,‖ and as in the first list so here also the last member is
specially emphasized by an addition:


v 8:
nuni de; ajpovuesue kai; uJmei`" ta; pavnta


ojgrhvn —qumovn


kakivan —blasyhmivan
aijscrologivan ejk tou` stovmato" uJmw`n.

v 8:
―But now put them all away,


anger —rage


malice —slander


filthy language from yo
     The opening words of verse 9 continue the series of imperatives and they are most
naturally connected with the preceding themes of ―slander‖ and ―abusive language‖: mh;
yeuvdesqe eij" a;llhvlou" (―Stop lying to one another‖). Two parallel aorist participial
clauses give the twofold reason for this abandonment of evil ways:


v 9:
ajpekdusavmenoi to;n palaio;n a[nqrwpon


su;n tai`" praxevsin aujtou`

v 10:
kai; ejndusavmenoi to;n nevon to;n ajnakainouvmenon


eij" ejpivgnwsin katÆ eijkovna tou` ktivsanto" aujtovn.

v 9:
―(Since) you have put off the old man


with his practices,

v 10:
and have put on the new man which is being renewed in knowledge in the Creator‘s
image.‖

    According to verse 11 within this realm of the new man (o{pou, ―where‖) the barriers
that divided people from one another are abolished. A strong negative (oujk e[ni, ―there is
not‖) is followed by four pairs of subdivisions of the human family, the first two of which
are linked by kaiv (―and‖). Finally, the concluding triumphant words contrast (ajllav, ―but‖)
the centrality of Christ with the divisions that separate people in the world (note the
emphasis of the statement which falls on the last word Cristov", ―Christ‖):


v 11:
o{pou oujk e[ni


ÔEllhn kai; ÆIoudai`o",


peritomh; kai; ajkrobustiva


bavrbaro"—Skuvqh"


dou`lo"—ejleuvqero",


ajlla; »ta;¼ pavnta kai; ejn pa`sin Cristov".

v 11:
―where there is no


Greek or Jew,


circumcised or uncircumcised,


barbarian—Scythian,


slave—free;


but Christ is al

Comment
    The exhortations to ―seek the things above‖ and to ―set the mind on the things above‖
find concrete expression and application in the following imperatives: ―put to death‖
(nekrwvsate, v 5), ―put away‖ (ajpovqesqe, v 8; cf. ―do not lie,‖ mh; yeuvdesfe, v 9), and
―put on‖ (ejnduvsasqe, v 12). Being heavenly minded does not mean living in the clouds!
The believer who obeys the apostolic injunction to aim at the things above will be involved
in an ongoing spiritual warfare here below as he or she puts to death sinful propensities and
pursuits, and allows the new nature to find outward expression in a godly life. Because they
are new persons in Christ they are to live like new persons. Having exposed and refuted the
claims of a false asceticism (2:20–23), the apostle now strongly urges a positive line of
self-control that is opposed to indulgence (vv 5–8) and affirms a life style that is consistent
with Christ himself, the image of the Creator (vv. 10, 11; cf. Martin, NCB, 102).
     5. nekrwvsate ou\n ta; mevlh ta; ejpi; th`" gh`" ―Put to death, therefore, whatever
belongs to your earthly nature‖ (NIV). The wording of Paul‘s first injunction in this
paraenetic section is designed to recall what he has written previously in the earlier part of
the letter: ―therefore‖ (ou\n) harks back to the general context of chapters 2:20–3:4, in
particular verses 3 and 4 where the theological basis is set forth (cf. Lohmeyer, 135;
Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 63; W. Nauck, ―Das ou\n-paräneticum,‖ ZNW 49 [1958] 134,
135), ―put to death‖ (nekrwvsate) recalls the union with Christ in his death (2:20; 3:3; cf.
2:11, 12), ―the things on earth‖ (ta; ejpi; th`" gh`") picks up the language of verse 2, ―[do
not set your mind on] the things on earth,‖ while ―members‖ (mevlh) is best under stood
against the background of ―the body of sin‖ (to; sw`ma th`" sarkov", 2:11) which has been
stripped off in the circumcision of Christ. Paul‘s imperative is based upon the previous
indicatives which spell out what God has done in his Son the Lord Jesus Christ.
nekrovw (―put to death‖; cf. BAG, 535; Bultmann, TDNT 4, 894), which is used in a literal
sense at Romans 4:19 and Hebrews 11:12 (both in the perfect passive with reference to
Abraham, meaning ―worn out,‖ ―as good as dead‖), is employed figuratively by Paul here
(so most commentators, cf. Bultmann, TDNT 4, 894; regarding the figurative use of the
adjective ―dead,‖ nekrov", see on 2:13; so also Luke 15:24, 32; Rom 6:11; 7:8; 8:10; Eph
2:1, 5; Col 2:13; Heb 6:1; 9:14; James 2:17, 26; Rev 3:1; and as a substantive: Matt 8:22;
Luke 9:60; John 5:25). This is similar to his use of ―count yourselves dead to sin‖
(logivzesqe eJautou;" nekrouv") at Romans 6:11 (cf. the indicative ―you put to death,‖
qanatou`te, Rom 8:13): in the Colossian injunction the aorist tense points to a decisive
initial act which introduces a settled attitude (as expressed by the present tense in Romans).
     That which is to be put to death is somewhat unusually described: ―the members which
are upon earth‖ (ta; mevlh ta; ejpi; th`" gh`"), and these are set in apposition to a list of five
vices commencing with ―fornication‖ (porneivan). mevlo" (―member,‖ ―part,‖ ―limb,‖ BAG,
501, 502; cf. Horst, TDNT 4, 555–68, Schütz, NIDNTT 1, 229–32, and Schweizer, Abraham,
437–39) was employed in the ancient world with a wide range of meanings and
applications, being used in secular Greek of the ―member of the body‖ (so Homer with
reference to both men and animals: Od 18, 70; 24, 368), an ―organ‖ (in relation to thought,
so Parmenides, Fr 16, 3), or in the sense of a ―melody‖ or ―song‖ (in Plato, Rep 3, 398d).
In the LXX the term denotes the bodily members of men (e.g. Judg 19:29; Job 9:28) and
animals (e.g. Exod 29:17) as well as signifying a song or melody (either a song of pleasure:
Ecclus 32:6, or a lament: Ezek 2:10; Mic 2:4; mevlo" is not used in this sense in the NT).
Within the NT the word is employed literally of various parts of the human body (so Matt
5:29, 30; Rom 6:13, 19; James 3:6, etc). But Paul is not here referring to the actual
members of the human body (as Meyer, 423, thought) nor does he mean quite the same
thing as Jesus intended when he spoke of cutting off the offending hand or foot, or plucking
out the offending eye if entrance into life could not otherwise be gained (Matt 5:29, 30;
18:8, 9; Mark 9:43–47). The point seems clear from the catalog of vices which is set in
apposition to the word ―members.‖
     Yet the conjunction of this list with the term ―members‖ is rather abrupt and various
attempts have been made to ease the difficulty. Lightfoot (209), for example, placed a
period after ―earth‖ (gh`") and regarded the following nouns (―fornication, uncleanness …‖
porneivan, ajkaqaraivan ktl.) as ―prospective accusatives‖ governed by a verb such as
―put off‖ or ―put away‖ (ajpovqesqe) as in verse 8. Accordingly, Paul intended to make
these accusatives directly dependent on the verb ―put off,‖ but he introduced the
intervening clauses which led to a change in the construction of the sentence. Although
such breaches are not uncommon in Paul, had he intended this he would probably have
placed the imperative before the list of nouns (cf. Bruce, 267, though note Moule, 116). In
order to remove the difficulty, Masson proposed that ―the members‖ be understood as a
vocative and refer to Christians as limbs of Christ‘s body (142; he appealed to BDF, para.
147[2] in support; cf. Turner, Insights, 104, 105). But this suggestion has not commended
itself to scholars (it has been argued that such an absolute use of ―members,‖ mevlh, would
be possible only if their membership in the body of Christ was made plain in the immediate
context: so Dibelius-Greeven 41, Bruce, 268).
Lohse agreed it was hardly possible to interpret ―members‖ here as man‘s bodily members.
Instead, he regarded it as a reference to a traditional form of expression: in Iranian thought
a man‘s members were his good or bad deeds out of which his heavenly self was
constituted and so his other-wordly fate was decided (137, following Richard Reitzenstein.
Note his Mystery-Religions, 338–51. cf. Dibelius-Greeven, 41, Conzelmann, 150). Five
virtues and five vices are mentioned in each instance in the Iranian tradition. Two catalogs
of vices (3:5, 8) and the list of virtues (3:12) are based on this enumeration. Without being
conscious of the history of religions connections (much less the myth of the two cosmic
―men‖ with their five members, as Käsemann argued) the author, according to Lohse, used
―members‖ in this traditional way and adopted the existing fivefold schema to spell out in
his exhortations the kind of life demanded of the Christian.
    But there is no need to look to Persian analogies (see the treatment below). Paul is
moving wholly within OT and Jewish categories (cf. Schweizer, Abraham, 437–39, who has
claimed that the close juxtaposition of ―members‖ and ―sin,‖ in which sins were localized
in the members, can be paralleled in Jewish texts such as 2 Apoc. Bar. 49:3, ―these
entrammelling members, which are now involved in evils, and in which evils are
consummated,‖ [Charles‘ translation]; see further his Commentary, 138). At Romans 6:13,
19 the apostle points out that the readers‘ bodily members can be offered, on the one hand,
to sin as instruments of wickedness and impurity, or, on the other, to God as instruments of
righteousness and holiness. At chapter 7:23 of the same letter he refers to the ―law of sin
which is in my members‖ (ejn toi`" mevlesivn mou). In Colossians 3:5 Paul goes further and
practically identifies the readers‘ members with the sins those members committed. They
had been used as instruments of sin in the old life (this is the point of the qualifying phrase
―which are upon earth,‖ ta; ejpi; th`" gh`"; it has nothing to do with the Greek view
whereby the spirit or soul of each man already lives ―above,‖ while the members in which
sin still works are said to be held fast ―below‖; cf. PhiloDetPotIns 85, who considered the
feet of man were rooted on earth while his mind and senses were already linked with the
circuits of air and heaven). So the term ―members‖ (mevlh) comes to be extended beyond its
ordinary sense to comprehend ―the various kinds of sin which were committed by their
means and in which the ‗flesh‘ (the old nature) expressed itself actively‖ (Bruce, 268). Here
the practices and attitudes to which the readers‘ bodily activity and strength had been
devoted in the old life is in view (Moule, 115, who regards the whole phrase, ta; mevlh ta;
ejpi; th`" gh`", as ―meaning ‗your limbs as put to earthly purposes,‘ the use of your limbs
[or organs] for sensuality,‖ cf. 1 Cor 6:15, and note Gundry, , 42, who arrives at much
the same conclusion when he states: ―we should probably treat ‗the members‘ as a
figurative expression for sins which constitute the earthly ‗old man‘ [v 9]‖). A similar
extension of meaning can be seen with reference to the related term ―body‖ (sw`ma): ―the
body of sin‖ (Rom 6:6), ―this body of death‖ (7:24), and ―your body is dead because of sin‖
(8:10). In these references it is not simply the physical body that is in view; rather sw`ma
denotes ―the whole personality organized for, and geared into rebellion against God‖
(Robinson, Body, 31).
     Putting to death those members which partake of the old nature is not the same as
―mortification of the flesh‖ traditionally understood, for as Moule, 114, has pointed out this
latter phrase during its long history has acquired certain associations, often standing for
self-inflicted bodily pain through flagellation as practiced by ascetics, or for ―self-denial‖ in
the form of abstaining from what one enjoys so as to gain control over the body or acquire
merit. But true ―mortification‖ in the context of Colossians 3:5 has to do with a
transformation of the will, a new attitude of the mind (cf. Rom 6:11), ―a radical shifting of
the very centre of the personality from self to Christ, such that ‗death‘ to selfishness is by
no means too strong a description‖ (Moule, 115).
     porneivan, ajkaqarsivan, pavqo", ejpiqumivan kakhvn, kai; th;n pleonexivan ktl. Five
sins are identified with the earthly members: fornication, impurity, lust, evil desire and
covetousness in general—a movement from the outward manifestations of sin to the inward
cravings of the heart, the acts of immorality and uncleanness to their inner springs.
This is the first of two catalogs of vices, the second series of five appears in verse 8, ―anger,
rage, malice, slander, filthy language‖ (NIV), and it is then followed by a list of five graces,
verse 12, ―compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience‖ (NIV) which the readers
are to put on like new clothing.

A Note on the New Testament Ethical Lists

1. Background
     Lists of virtues and vices meet us in the NT, particularly in the writings of Paul (Rom
1:29–32; 1 Cor 5:9–11; 6:9, 10; Gal 5:19–23; Phil 4:8; 1 Tim 3:1–13; Titus 1:5–9; 1 Pet
4:3, etc). They were a common form among pagan moralists and, at least as far as the vices
were concerned, in the antipagan polemic of Jewish propagandists. Some have argued that
these lists in the NT were indebted to Jewish proselyte catechism as the church took over
lists of ethical qualities required by its self-understanding as a neo-levitical community (so
P. Carrington and G. Klein). This suggested origin has been challenged recently,
particularly by those who have traced the genesis of such lists to Stoicism (Easton, JBL 51
[1932] 1; Vögtle Lasterkataloge) or to Iranian influences, mediated through sectarian
Judaism, such as the Qumran community (Wibbing, Lasterkataloge). But Christian
borrowing from Stoicism was limited; there is no Stoic parallel to Paul‘s identification of
virtues with the ―fruit of the Spirit‖ (Gal 5:22, 23); the four cardinal virtues (wisdom,
manliness, self-control, righteousness) and corresponding vices (folly, cowardice,
intemperance, injustice) are not present in the NT catalogs (cf. Wibbing, Lasterkataloge,
86); and several of the so-called virtues in the NT lists were regarded as vices in Stoicism.
So, for example, ―humility‖ (tapeinofrosuvh) was a term of opprobrium in Greek thought
(Grundmann, TDNT 8, 2), while in the Qumran literature (1QS 5:3, 4; cf. 1QS 2:24; 4:3, 4;
5:25) and in Paul (cf. Phil 2:3; Col 3:12) it denoted the ―practice of living together in
community before God in such a way that other people are given a dignity and respect as
they too are seen in God‘s sight … The ‗humility‘ of Christ becomes a model‖ (Martin,
NIDNTT 3, 928).
Kamlah (Form) varied Wibbing‘s suggestion of an Iranian origin of the NT catalogs by
distinguishing two forms, a ―descriptive‖ catalog which closed with a promise of salvation
and a threat of destruction (e.g. Gal 5:19–23), partly based on the lex talionis, ―destruction
to the destroyer‖ (cf. E. Käsemann, ―Sentences of Holy Law in the New Testament.‖ New
Testament Questions of Today. Tr W.J. Montague [London: SCM, 1969] 66–81), and a
―paraenetic‖ one, a putting off of the old life as a prelude to putting on the new (e.g. Col
2:20–3:17), which he traced to the Hellenistic syncretism of the mystery cults. However,
Schroeder (IDBSup, 546) has argued against this on the ground that the NT lists manifest the
ethical dualism of the OT particularly the apocalyptic promises and threats which contain
lists of blessings and curses (Deut 27–30)—note the closing appeal: ―See, I have set before
you this day life and prosperity, death and destruction … blessing and curses. Now choose
life‖ (30:15, 19; cf. Jer 21:8; Ezek 18:5–9, 15–17).
     Virtues and vices recur in the ―Two Ways‖ scheme, found in Didache 1–5; Barn 18–20
and Hermes, Man 6:1; cf. Ignatius, Magn. 5; 2 Clem 4. It has been suggested that underlying
this is the Jewish proselyte catechism with its way of light and way of darkness, governed
by the spirits of truth and error (Test Levi 19:1; Test Judah 20:1; and especially 1Q S). The
contrast of men walking in two ways is typically an OT one (Ps 1:6; 16:11; 119:33; Deut
5:33; 11:22; Josh 22:5; Prov 8:13; Jer 21:8; Zech 1:4; cf. Martin, NIDNTT 3, 929).

2. Characteristics of Paul‘s Ethical Lists
    Several features of the Pauline catalogs are to be noted: (a) it is evident that
considerable variety exists in both their form and content. No hypothetical original list
appears to have existed (Easton, JBL 51 [1932] 7); there is too much variety, not only in the
number of items but also in their sequence, to suggest there were fixed general rules for
their logical construction (Wibbing, Lasterkataloge, 81–83; cf. Kamlah, Form, 176, who
claims they were multiform regarding both their content and form).
    (b) However, it is going too far to say that the sins or virtues listed have little or nothing
to do with the contexts in which they appear (cf. Lohse, 137, 138); the items specifically
mentioned are often significant or exemplary (cf. Col 3:5, 8 and note below) and may
change according to the situation (Schweizer, Rechtfertigung, 476). In most cases they are
not full or exhaustive catalogs, a point that is made specifically at the conclusion of the list
of vices in Galatians 5:19–21, ―… envy, drunkenness, orgies, and the like‖ (kai; ta; o{moia
touvtoi").
(c) Paul‘s lists of vices are frequently set within the framework of God‘s judgment and the
final day: so evildoers, the unrighteous and those who practice such sins will not inherit the
kingdom of God, according to 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10, Galatians 5:21 and Ephesians 5:5;
while Romans 1:29–31 indicates that those who commit these transgressions or encourage
others to do the same deserve death. Following the list of pagan vices at Colossians 3:5 the
apostle goes on to assert that on account of these things the wrath of God falls (v 6).
    (d) These catalogs are not to be understood in a moralistic sense or as some kind of new
law so that the avoidance of the sins or the exercise of the virtues listed would lead to the
achievement of righteousness or the acquiring of merit. Rather, they describe the walk of
the Christian (Rom 1:29–31 is a catalog of pagan vices). So the persons who clothe
themselves with the graces of Christ, such as compassion, kindness, humility, and so on,
are addressed as ―God‘s chosen people, holy and dearly loved‖ (Col 3:12). They have
already been raised with Christ (3:1, 3), and have put on the new man (v 10). The graces
produced in their lives are the fruit of God‘s Spirit (Gal 5:22–23; cf. Eph 5:8–11; James
3:13–18, esp. v 18; Matt 7:16–20; Kamlah, Form, 182, claims that the influence of Ps 1:3 is
discernible in these passages). Similarly, they are to reject pagan ways, such as fornication
and idolatry, from their pre-Christian past (Col 3:5; cf. 1 Cor 6:9, 10; 1 Pet 4:3, ―For you
have spent enough time in the past doing what pagans choose to do—living in debauchery,
lust, drunkenness, orgies, carousing and detestable idolatry‖ [NIV]) because they have
already been united with Christ in his death (Col 2:11, 12, 20; 3:3). Getting rid of a
repulsive collection of habits (as one might cast aside old clothes) such as anger, quick
temper, malice together with slander and foul talk is to be effected because they have
stripped off (ajpekdusavmenoi) the ―old man‖ that they once were, together with the
practices he loved to indulge in (3:8, 9). Obedience to the apostolic injunctions to reject sin
and be clothed with the graces of Christ is necessary for men and women who are in a new
relationship with God through Christ and have become part of God‘s new creation
(Wibbing, Lasterkataloge, 123–27).

Comment
    The five sins listed are those which belonged to their pagan past (v 7). These were vices
for which the Jews especially reproached the pagans (cf. Wisd 14 and note Easton, JBL 51
[1932] 1–12, who has drawn attention to the presuppositions of the Hellenistic Jewish
apologetics which he considers are visible in the NT lists of virtues and vices).
porneiva (―prostitution,‖ ―unchastity,‖ ―fornication,‖ of every kind of unlawful sexual
intercourse, BAG, 693) which is mentioned first in the list is always emphatically forbidden.
Paul regularly brings to the attention of Gentile Christians the incompatibility of porneiva
and the kingdom of God. It is the first of the works of the flesh (Gal 5:19) from which
believers are to abstain (1 Thess 4:3) or shun (1 Cor 6:18), since no ―sexually immoral
person‖ (povrno") will inherit the kingdom of God (1 Cor 6:9; cf. 5:9–11; Eph 5:5). The
term porneiva carries several shades of meaning in the NT, ranging from extramarital sexual
relationships (1 Thess 4:3) to marriages contracted with partners within illicit degrees of
kinship (so probably Acts 15:20, though see M. Simon, ―The Apostolic Decree and its
Setting in the Ancient Church,‖ BJRL 52 [196970] 437–60, who understands the decree as a
condensed code of levitical purity based mainly on Lev 16–18, but also as regards mixed
marriages, on Exod 34:15–16; porneiva should be understood as a general term including
all sorts of sexual impurities). It denotes any kind of illegitimate sexual intercourse (cf .
BAG, 693; Hauck/Schulz, TDNT 6, 579–95; Reisser, NIDNTT 1, 497–501; this however has
been questioned by B. Malina, ―Does Porneia Mean Fornication?‖ NovT 14 [1972] 10–17;
note, however, J. Jensen, ―Does Porneia Mean Fornication? A Critique of Bruce Malina.‖
NovT 20 [1978]: 161–84, who argues that the term and its cognates in the NT describe
wanton sexual behavior including fornication) and the word-group was employed in the
LXX (rendering the Hebrew ) to denote unchastity, harlotry, prostitution and
fornication (Gen 34:31, 38:15; Lev 19:29; Deut 22:21). In later rabbinic literature, . (=
porneiva) was understood as including not only prostitution and any kind of extramarital
sexual intercourse ( 2:8) but also all marriages between relatives forbidden by
rabbinic law (cf. Str-B 2, 729, 730). Incest (Test Rub 1:6; Test Jud 13:6; cf. Lev 18:6–18)
and all kinds of unnatural sexual intercourse (e.g. Test Ben 9:1) were regarded as
fornication (porneiva). One who surrenders to it indicates ultimately that he has broken
with God (Wisd 14:27, 28; cf. Reisser, NIDNTT 1, 499). In contrast to the loose living that
prevailed in the Hellenistic world the NT, and in particular Pauline, teaching requires
unconditional obedience to the prohibition against ―fornication‖ (cf. Vögtle,
Lasterkataloge, 223–25, Hauck/Schulz, TDNT 6, 593, 594, and Lohse, 138).
    ajkaqarsiva (―impurity,‖ i.e. moral uncleanness, though on occasion it described
ceremonial impurity: Matt 23:27; cf. Num 19:13) which occurs frequently with porneiva
(―fornication‖) and denotes immoral sexual conduct, underscores Paul‘s injunction
(according to Schweizer, 143 and Rechtfertigung, 475, the meaning of the first member,
porneiva, is developed through the following three). ―Impurity‖ like ―fornication‖ is a work
of the flesh (Gal 5:19) and incompatible with life in the Spirit (1 Thess 4:7, 8, ―For God did
not call us to be impure [ejpi; ajkaqarsiva/] but to live a holy life … he who rejects this
instruction does not reject man but God, who gives you his Holy Spirit‖; 2 Cor 12:21; Rom
1:24; Eph 5:3, 5; cf. Hauck, TDNT 3, 427–29). Like the other members of this list it points
to the immoral state of the pre-Christian life, to the behavior of the man whose actions are
determined by his commitment to his natural lusts; and yet it was all too easy for Gentile
converts to slip back into pre-conversion ways—hence the admonition.
    pavqo" (―passion‖) was used by the Stoics to describe the person who allowed himself
to be dominated by his emotions, and therefore could not attain ―tranquility‖ (ajpavqeia; cf.
Vögtle, Lasterkataloge, 208–210). In the NT references, all of which occur in Paul (Rom
1:26; Col 3:5 and 1 Thess 4:5), it does not turn up in this Stoic sense; rather it denotes
shameful passion which leads to sexual excesses (1 Thess 4:5; the vices of homosexuality
at Rom 1:26; note Michaelis, TDNT 5, 928).
ejpiqumiva (―desire,‖ ―longing‖) was employed in a positive fashion to describe a variety of
aims including the longing to see a Christian congregation (1 Thess 2:17) or the desire to
depart and be with Christ (Phil 1:23; cf. Luke 22:15; the verb ―desire,‖ ejpiqumevw, can also
be used in a good sense: Matt 13:17; Luke 17:22; 1 Tim 3:1; Heb 6:11; 1 Pet 1:12; cf.
Büchsel, TDNT 3, 168–71). Here the desire is characterized negatively with the addition of
the adjective ―evil‖ (kakhvn) so that it describes wicked concupiscence (Büchsel, TDNT 3,
170, 171, points out that the noun and the verb usually indicate evil desires which may then
be expanded with reference to the object of the longing: Matt 5:28, a woman; Mark 4:19,
other things; 1 Cor 10:6, evil things; or the direction: Gal 5:17, against the Spirit; or the
vehicle or origin: Rom 1:24, the heart; Rom 6:12, the body; Gal 5:16; Eph 2:3; 1 John 2:16;
2 Pet 2:18, the flesh, and so on). Evil desire is a manifestation of the sin which dwells in the
natural man and which controls him. It reveals his carnality (Gal 5:16, 24), his separation
from God and his subjection to divine wrath (Rom 1:18–24).
    The final member of the list ―covetousness‖ (pleonexiva, lit. ―a desire to have more,‖ so
meaning ―greediness,‖ ―insatiableness,‖ ―avarice,‖ BAG, 667; see Delling, TDNT 6, 266–74,
and Selter, NIDNTT 1, 137, 138) is especially accented as a gross sin: ―and that chief vice,
covetousness which is idolatry‖ (so BDF, para. 258[1], who note, ―the addition of the
relative clause h{ti" etc occasions the use of the article by making the preceding noun
definite‖; cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 64; Schweizer, 143, 144). It breaks the sequence
by turning attention from sexual vices to the more general sin of greed (Martin, NCB, 103).
In some contexts, of course, covetousness can have sexual overtones (cf. the cognate
pleonektevw at 1 Thess 4:6; the noun was used by Plato and Aristotle to include sexual
desire), but normally it refers to the sin of acquisitiveness, the insatiable desire to lay hands
on material things. The word group appears only occasionally in the LXX, occurring chiefly
in the denunciations and warnings of the prophets about dishonest gain and the enrichment
of the politically powerful by means of violence (Jer 22:17; Ezek 22:27; Hab 2:9). The
ungodly and thoroughly bad character of covetousness comes out in the LXX references (cf.
2 Macc 4:50). Accordingly, the psalmist prays that he may be preserved from it (Ps 119:36
[LXX 118:36]). Even in the Greco-Roman world covetousness was repudiated; there was no
place for it in a just and equitable society.
The NT warns again and again about the sin of covetousness, particularly as a means of
security (Luke 12:15, ―Watch out! Be on your guard against all kinds of greed [ajpo; pavsh"
pleonexiva"]‖). In the catalogs of vices covetousness is the mark of a life which lacks the
knowledge of God (Rom 1:29; cf. 1 Cor 5:10, 11; 6:10, 11; Eph 5:3). Its presence along
with other kinds of wickedness is evidence, according to Paul, of the power of sin in the
ravaging of human relationships (Delling, TDNT 6, 272) and a sign that God has given men
and women over to a depraved mind (Rom 1:28). For Christians involved in the ministry of
God‘s Word there is a particular danger of covetousness. The temptation to abuse one‘s
position and to exploit the preaching of God‘s Word for personal gain was a danger from
which the early church did not escape. Paul refutes the suggestion that he and his
co-workers had exploited anyone at Corinth, desiring to enrich themselves by their ministry
(cf. the cognate pleonektevw, ―cheat,‖ ―defraud,‖ used at 2 Cor 7:2 and 12:17). In his
missionary work at Thessalonica, as elsewhere, he was free not only from self-seeking
motives (1 Thess 2:4, 5) which might have been hidden behind an unselfish activity (v 3)
but also from covetousness; when he preached he had no ulterior purpose of enriching
himself (―nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed [ou[te ejn profavsei pleonexiva"],‖
v 5; cf. Delling, TDNT 6, 273). Although the charge could not stick in the case of Paul, for it
was wholly unfounded, there were others who abused their position to satisfy their greed:
Paul‘s opponents at Corinth are described as ―peddlers of God‘s word‖ (kaphleuvonte"
to;n lovgon tou` qeon`, 2 Cor 2:17), while according to 2 Peter 2:3, 14 the false teachers
exploited the congregation, being motivated by their greed for material gain—in fact, they
are said to be experts in greed! But it was not only those involved in the ministry of God‘s
Word who were open to the tempation of covetousness. Paul‘s exhortation here in verse 5 is
addressed to all the readers. Like immorality and impurity, covetousness is to be put to
death by all who died and rose with Christ.
     The danger of covetousness is stressed emphatically because it is so closely related to
idolatry: rather suprisingly the former is equated with the latter (th;n pleonexivan h{ti"
ejsti;n eijdwlolatriva). The two sins stood together in Jewish exhortations and were
condemned as part of the horrors of paganism. According to the Testament of Judah (19:1)
greed seized control of a man, led him away from God and held him captive in idolatry:
―The love of money leads to idolatry; because, when led astray through money, men name
as gods those who are not gods.‖ Elsewhere in Jewish thought greed was soundly
condemned (by Philo, Spec. Leg. 1:23–27; cf. Delling, TDNT 6, 270; for rabbinic examples
see Str-B 3, 606, 607; and note the negative judgment on possessions in the writings of the
Qumran community: 1QpHab 6:1; 8:11, 12; 1QS 10:19, 11:2, etc). Since a man can serve
only one master, God or mammon, but not both (Matt 6:24), then if he sets his heart on
wealth, he adores false gods and abandons the one true God (Lohse, 139; Schweizer, Text,
200, aptly remarks: ―When man has lost God, he is at the mercy of all things, because his
own covetousness takes the place of God‖). Instead of setting his aims and whole
orientation on the things above, at the center of which is the exalted Christ, he is seeking
the things below. He worships and serves the creature rather than the Creator (Rom 1:25).
The apostle‘s words in Romans 7:7, 8 indicate how the commandment revealed to him the
special deadliness of this subtle sin. Perhaps it is the more dangerous because it may
assume so many respectable forms.
6. di` a{ e[rcetai hJ ojrgh; tou` qeou` [ejpi; tou;" uiJou;" th`" ajpeiqeiva"]. These are the things
for which men and women will be punished with divine retribution. Several of the NT lists
of vices conclude with a reference to God‘s judgment on sin. So in his great arraignment of
the pagan world at Romans 1:18–32, the apostle sets his lengthy catalog of vices within the
context of God‘s wrath (v 18) and concludes that men who practice such things deserve
death (v 32). At 1 Thessalonians 4 when dealing with the related issues of sexual
immorality (porneiva, v 3) and covetousness (pleonektevw, v 6), Paul states that the ―Lord
will punish men for all such sins‖ (v 6), while at the conclusion of a list of vices in 1
Corinthians 5:13, the note of God‘s judgment is struck again. A similar motif appears at 1
Corinthians 6:9, 10 and Galatians 5:21 (cf. Eph 5:5, 6) in conjunction with these catalogs,
this time in terms of people who live in a pagan way not inheriting the kingdom of God.
The serious note of God‘s judgment on those who practice these vices was written to
Christian congregations and served as a solemn reminder of what would have happened to
them had they continued to live in their former pagan ways. And indirectly, if not
explicitly, an added reason is set forth for avoiding these sins, for putting to death the
members upon earth.
    The expression ―the wrath of God‖ (hJ ojrgh; tou` qeou`) turns up in both Old and New
Testaments to describe God‘s holy anger against sin and the judgment that results (cf. 1
Thess 1:10; 2:16; note especially the treatment of Stählin, TDNT 5, 419–47, who recognizes
that although ojrghv in most NT passages is the divine work or judgment of wrath [cf. Rom
2:5; 3:5; 12:19, etc] the idea of an actual attitude of God cannot be disputed in many NT
verses, any more than this is possible in the case of ―love‖ or ―mercy.‖ In sum, the NT, like
the Old, presents ojrghv as ―both God‘s displeasure at evil, His passionate resistance to every
will which is set against Him, and also His judicial attack thereon‖ [425]). Unlike the wrath
ascribed to pagan deities of the ancient world this phrase and its equivalents denote neither
God‘s vindictive anger nor his outbursts of passion (the term qumov", ―passion,‖ ―wrath,‖
―rage,‖ turns up at Rom 2:8 with reference to the wrath of God but it is used synonymously
with ojrghv; the occasional heaping up of such terms [Rom 2:8, 9; cf. Rev 16:19] serves not
to describe unbridled and hence unrighteous revenge, but to enhance the shattering
impression of the reality of the divine wrath, cf. Stählin, TDNT 5, 422). Many of the Pauline
passages speak about ―wrath‖ (ojrghv) without the qualifying genitive ―of God‖ ([tou`] qeou`:
Rom 2:5 [twice], 8; 3:5; 4:15; 5:9; 9:22 [twice]; 12:19; 13:4, 5; Eph 2:3; 1 Thess 1:10;
2:16; 5:9; contrast Rom 1:18; Eph 5:6; Col 3:6 where the qualifying genitive appears).
Accordingly the suggestion has been advanced that ―wrath‖ in Paul is an autonomous entity
alongside God, either as an independently operating though personified force, or as a
principle of retribution that is not to be associated closely with the personality of God.
Concerning the former alternative it was argued that this personification of ―wrath‖ was
prefigured in the OT when reference was made to the instruments of wrath together with the
many figurative impressions of the sending, coming and passing of wrath (e.g. Isa 10:6;
26:20; cf. Isa 63:5: ―Then my fury helped me;‖ see Stählin, TDNT 5, 414, 424, for
references). Judaism developed the line still further and this ―absolute‖ view in the NT is a
continuation of this development. C. H. Dodd was an energetic exponent of the latter,
though closely related, alternative. He points out that Paul never uses the verb to ―be angry‖
with God as subject, and claims that wrath meant ―not … the attitude of God to man, but …
an inevitable process of cause and effect in a moral universe‖ (The Epistle of Paul to the
Romans [London: Hodder, 1932] 23; cf. G. H. C. Macgregor‘s essay, ―The Concept of the
Wrath of God in the New Testament,‖ NTS 7 [1960–61] 101–109).
However, against both variations it needs to be argued, first, that in the above-mentioned
references ―the wrath‖ (hJ ojrghv) and ―wrath‖ without the article (ojrghv) decisively point to
God‘s holy anger (just as eujdokiva, ―good pleasure,‖ and qevlhma, ―will,‖ can be used
without qualification of the good pleasure or will of God). Second, one cannot on the basis
of several figurative references personify wrath over against God himself (see below). In
both Old and New Testaments it is indissolubly related to God (cf. H. C. Hahn, NIDNTT 1,
107–13). Third, the wrath of God is not to be set in sharp contrast with the love and mercy
of God. It is so often asserted that if God is truly love he cannot be angry. But wrath and
love are not mutually exclusive. In the NT as well as in the Old, in Jesus as in the prophets
and apostles the proclamation of God‘s mercy is accompanied by the preaching of his
wrath. A holy God does not stand idly by when men act unrighteously, transgress the law,
show disdain to him as their creator or spurn his love and mercy. He acts in a righteous
manner punishing sin in the present and especially on the final day. Yet God also acquits
the guilty, and only the person who understands something of the greatness of his wrath
will be mastered by the greatness of his mercy. The converse also is true: only he who has
experienced the greatness of God‘s mercy can understand something of how great that
wrath must be (Stählin, TDNT 5, 425).
    7. You used to practice these same vices on account of which God‘s wrath is coming; in
fact, your lives were characterized by them. At verses 7 and 8 the ―once-now‖ antithesis is
repeated (see on 1:21, 22 and 2:13, and note Tachau, Einst, 123–25) as the readers (cf. the
emphatic ―and you,‖ v 7) are shown how they ought to behave now in contrast to their past.
In the two earlier contexts (1:21, 22 and 2:13) the antithetical statements described their
previous lost condition and their present standing in Christ. Here, however, the ―once-now‖
antithesis functions rather differently. The past behavior is characterized by the indicative
mood (periepathvsate, ―you walked‖ and ejzh`te, ―you lived,‖ v 7), but instead of
following this with another indicative to describe their present standing the apostle employs
an imperative ―put away‖ (ajpovqesqe, v 8; cf. Rom 6:15–23; 7:4–6; Gal 4:8–11; Eph 5:8) to
spell out their new responsibilities in Christ. At the same time the two catalogs of vices (vv
5, 8) are joined together through the ―once-now‖ schema (the antecedent of ejn oi|", ―in
which,‖ v 7, is the first list of vices, v 5, while ta; pavnta, ―all,‖ v 8, is defined more
precisely by the second catalog) in two sentences which are constructed chiastically (cf.
Tachau, Einst, 124):
ejn oi|" kai; uJmei`"
periepathvsatev pote …



nuni; de; ajpovqesqe
kai; uJmei`" ta; pavnta


lit.
―In which also you but now put away
walked once, …
(you also) them
all.‖


    ejn oi|" kai; uJmei`" periepathvsatev pote ―you too used to walk in these ways.‖ If Paul
has been drawing upon traditional lists of vices (see above) then he is applying them to the
readers (hence kai; uJmei`", ―you also‖), reminding them of their pre-Christian past (so
Vögtle, Lasterkataloge, 19, Jervell, Imago, 235, Lohse, 140, Martin, NCB, 104; ejn oi|" is
neuter, ―in which,‖ if the shorter reading of v 6 is followed [see the note above, 173], and
designates the vices of v 5 on account of which God‘s wrath comes; if, however, one reads
―upon the sons of disobedience‖ [ejpi; tou;" uiJou;" th`" ajpeiqeiva"] of v 6 then ejn oi|"
would be masculine meaning ―among whom‖; the shorter reading is preferred for the
reasons given). The Colossians had conducted their lives (on the verb peripatevw, ―walk,‖
a favorite Pauline metaphor, drawn from the OT and Jewish tradition, for a way of life see
above on 1:10 and 2:6) by doing evil deeds (cf. 1:21). Their outward behavior corresponded
with their established attitudes and sentiments (Caird, 205; the o{te [―when‖] clause
expands on the preceding: the imperfect tense of the verb zavw, ―live,‖ draws attention to a
continuing state with its fixed attitudes, while ejn touvtoi", ―in them,‖ is more emphatic and
condemnatory than the expected ejn aujtoi`", so Lightfoot, 211), and they were dead in their
sins (cf. 2:13).
8. nuni; de; ajpovqesqe kai; uJmei`" ta; pavnta ktl. But a change has occurred, (on the
―once-now‖ antithesis see on v 7; cf. Stählin, TDNT 4, 1121) and they are to discard their
old repulsive habits like a set of worn-out clothes. ajpotivqhmi meaning to ―put away‖ was
used literally with reference to clothes at Acts 7:58 (cf. 2 Macc 8:35; Jos Ant 8, 266) and in
a metaphorical and ethical sense at Romans 13:12; Ephesians 4:22, 25; Hebrews 12:1;
James 1:21; and 1 Peter 2:1. For the representation of behavior or character as a garment
see Job 29:14; Psalm 35:26; 109:29; 132:9; Isaiah 11:5; 59:17; 61:10; Romans 13:12, 14;
and 1 Thessalonians 5:8. The notion is extended to the putting off of the old (terrestrial)
body and the putting on of the new (celestial) one (in 1 Cor 15:53, 54; 2 Cor 5:2–4; cf.
Bruce, 271). In Colossians 3 although there is no specific reference to having put off the old
man until verse 9, the object of the putting aside in verse 8 is a totality (ta; pavnta) and best
understood as a reference to the entire sinful nature (cf. Kamlah, Form, 183, and Lohse,
140; at Heb 12:1; James 1:21; 1 Pet 2:1 the same verb ―put off‖ is joined to ―all‖). The
readers (kai; uJmei`" underscores the contrast with what they once were) are to put aside
everything that was done in connection with the old m
    ojrghvn, qumovn, kakivan, blasfhmivan, aijscrologivan ejk tou` stovmato" uJmw`n. The
content of this ―all‖ (ta; pa;nta) is spelled out in the fivefold catalog of vices (which may
have been taken over from traditional material, as many suggest but which were entirely
relevant to the concrete situation addressed, cf. Moule, RevExp 70 [1973] 488); ―all‖ looks
forward prospectively to the list of five vices which follow (so Moule, 118, though cf. his
article, RevExp 70 [1973] 488; Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 64, and Lohse, 140, rather than
referring back to all the evils just mentioned in v 5 and adding a further characterization of
them in terms of other sins [cf. Lightfoot, 212, Williams, 128, Meyer, 429]). The sins to be
put off are anger, quick temper, malice and the language which accompanies these things,
slander and foul talk. (Commentators like Caird, 205, who consider the phrase ―from your
mouth‖ belongs to the verb ―put away‖ rather than with the last noun in the list regard all
five vices as forms of intemperate speech; but there are difficulties with this view: first,
―wrath‖ and ―passion,‖ as well as ―evil,‖ have to be restricted to sins of the tongue, cf .
Williams, 128; and, second, the expression ―from your mouth‖ is distant from the verb ―put
away‖.)
    ojrghv (―wrath‖) and qumov" (―anger‖) go together and although Stoic thinkers
distinguished the two, the one denoting a more or less settled feeling of hatred, the other a
tumultuous outburst of passion (for references see Lightfoot, 212), there appears to be little
difference between them here: as outbursts of temper they are destructive of harmony in
human relationships (cf. Büchsel, TDNT 3, 168; Moule, 118) and both must be put away (cf.
Eph 4:31). (On the almost totally negative appraisal of human anger in the N T see Stählin,
TDNT 5, 420, 421; note the exception at Eph 4:26, ―If you are angry, be careful not to sin‖.)
The rage of anger (plural qumoiv) belongs to the ―works of the flesh‖ (Gal 5:19, 20) and
ought not to be found among Christ‘s people (2 Cor 12:20).
Along with these, ―malice‖ (kakiva) is to be removed since it is an evil force that destroys
fellowship. The term is a general one (cf. BAG, 397, Grundmann, TDNT 3, 482–84) ranging
from ―trouble‖ (with no moral implications, Matt 6:34), to a definitely culpable attitude of
―wickedness.‖ It might denote a single iniquity such as the grasping desire of Simon Magus
(Acts 8:22) or be used more generally for the evil men do to one another. Martin includes it
as one of the sins of speech (NCB, 104, 105; he claims that at 1 Cor 5:8; 14:20; Rom 1:29
and Eph 4:31 it depicts the havoc to human society wrought by evil-speaking), though it is
possible to regard it here as ―malice,‖ that is, the deliberate intention to harm which is
subsequently expressed in evil speech such as ―slander‖ and ―abusive language.‖


    blasfhmiva (―slander,‖ ―defamation,‖ ―blasphemy,‖ BAG, 143; cf. Beyer, TDNT 1,
621–25) in biblical Greek most frequently referred to ―speech against God,‖ for even when
the object of the attack was human, it was usually in some sense as God‘s representative (2
Kings 6:22; 19:4; Isa 52:5; Ezek 35:12, 13; 2 Macc 8:4; 9:28; 10:4, 34; cf. Moule, 118;
Währisch/Brown, NIDNTT 3, 341, 342). In NT times ―blasphemy‖ was directed immediately
against God (Rev 13:6; 16:11, 21), against the name of God (Rom 2:24; 1 Tim 6:1; Rev
16:9), against the word of God (Tit 2:5), against Moses and God, and so against the bearer
of the revelation in the law (Acts 6:11; Beyer, TDNT 1, 622, 623). In nonbiblical Greek the
term often meant ―abuse‖ or ―slander,‖ and probably has this sense of defamation of human
character here in an ethical list rather than to a curse directed against God (so many recent
commentators including Martin, NCB, 105, Lohse, 140, and Schweizer, 145; Beyer, TDNT 1,
624, on the other hand, claims that the predominantly religious connotation of blasphemy
against God is present in the lists of offenses even when it is not explicitly mentioned:
Mark 7:22; Matt 15:19; Eph 4:31; Col 3:8; 1 Tim 6:4; 2 Tim 3:2; this presumably could
arise when Christians were under persecution or in the company of derisive
non-Christians). Accordingly, it covers any type of vilifying of man, either by lies or
gossip. The Christian is commanded to ―slander no one‖ (Tit 3:2).
     The last of the five vices, aijscrologiva (―foul talk‖) like its counterpart in the previous
list (―covetousness,‖ v 5), is especially emphasized this time by the additional words ―out
of your mouth‖ (cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 44; some commentators take the phrase as
applying to both ―slander‖ and ―foul talk,‖ so for example Abbott, 283; others, as we have
noted above, link the phrase with the verb ―put off‖). aijscrologiva occurs only here in the
NT but outside the Bible covers the ideas of obscene speech or abusive language (Lightfoot,
212, who supposes that the two notions of ―filthiness‖ and ―evil-speaking‖ are included
here; cf. BAG, 25). Such language ought to be stopped before it comes out of their mouths.
9. You used to tell lies to one another as though it was the natural thing to do; don‘t do it
any more (this is probably the significance of the present imperative, so Bruce, 272, though
cf. Moule, Idiom Book, 20, 21). mh; yenvdesq e eij" ajllhvlou" continues the series of
imperatives and is most naturally connected with the preceding notions of ―slander‖ and
―abusive language.‖ As Martin (NCB, 105) rightly points out this injunction does not come
as an anticlimax. The ―social effects of untrustworthy promises and pledges are enormous.‖
The expression ―to one another‖ (eij" ajllhvlou") shows that the exhortation has particular
reference to believers in their relations within the Christian community. This, of course, in
no way suggests that Christians could take the question of truth less seriously when
speaking to outsiders. The apostle is simply asserting that in their regular contact with
fellow-believers they must speak ―the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.‖
     The twofold reason for this abandonment of evil ways is now given: (1) you have put
off the old man with his practices (v 9), and (2) you have put on the new man … (v 10).
Many exegetes consider that the two aorist participles ajpekdusavmenoi (―having put off,‖ v
9) and ejndusavmenoi (―having put on,‖ v 10) are to be understood in an imperatival sense,
so that in effect Paul is continuing his appeal begun with the injunction, ―Don‘t lie.‖
Accordingly, the readers are urged to give up the old nature with its habits and to replace it
by putting on the new man. Grammatically this interpretation is possible (cf. Merk,
Handeln, 205), and the use of the participle for the imperative was a genuine Hellenistic
development (Moulton, Grammar 1, 180–83), with instances in the NT (e.g., Rom 12:9)
while examples of this phenomenon were common enough in rabbinic usage (as D. Daube
has demonstrated, cf. his ―Participle and Imperative in 1 Peter,‖ in E. G. Selwyn, The First
Epistle of St Peter [London: Macmillan, 1947] 467–88; note also E. Lohse, ―Paränese und
Kerygma im 1. Petrusbrief,‖ ZNW 45 [1954] 75, 76, and his commentary, 141). However,
the alternative view of treating the two verbs as true participles which describe the past
event, in which the readers have already put off the old nature and put on the new, as the
basis for the abandonment of evil ways, is preferable since it is more in keeping with Paul‘s
teaching elsewhere in Colossians (the parallel passage in Ephesians 4:22–24 supports the
imperatival translations though the point being made there, using infinitives rather than
participles, is somewhat different). In the paraenetic sections of Colossians the apostle
grounds his exhortations in what has already occurred to the readers when they were
incorporated in Christ (2:6, 7 and 2:16–3:4; Jervell, Imago, 236, has argued this point
forcibly; cf. Abbott, 283; Masson, 143; Larsson, Christus, 198; Maurer, TDNT 6, 644; Merk,
Handeln, 205; and Martin, NCB, 106). Paul often refers back to the readers‘ life-changing
event; he does so by means of an aorist participle or an aorist indicative (1:6, 7, 13, 22; 2:6,
7, 11–15, 20; 3:1, 3). It is therefore natural to regard these participles of verses 9 and 10 in
a similar light, indicating that the readers had stripped off the old man when baptized into
Christ‘s death and put on the new man. Verse 12 with its exhortation to put on the graces of
Christ (or God) is then grounded in the fact that they had put on the new man.
The picture of putting on and putting off a garment was widespread in the ancient world
and was employed in the mystery religions with reference to the action of initiation. The
putting on of the garment consecrated the initiate so that he was filled with the powers of
the cosmos and shared in the divine life. In Gnostic texts the donning of the garment
indicates that redemption had come, a redemption that would be subsequently perfected (so
Käsemann noted by Lohse, 141). But the background of the expression ―putting off the old
man‖ and ―putting on the new man‖ was neither Gnosticism nor the mystery religions. The
clothing metaphor was common in Hebrew and Greek writings, but not with ―man‖ as an
object. (Against the background of initiation into the Isis-mysteries as described by
Apuleius in his Metamorphoses XI, 23f. and cited by Lohse, 141, three objections have
been raised: (a) none of the parallels cited is pre-Christian; (b) most parallels belong to a
different sphere of ideas; and (c) a literal parallel, i.e., putting on or putting off a ―man,‖ has
not yet been found). In the OT the notion of being clothed with moral and religious qualities
is found, e.g. strength (Isa 51:9; 52:1), righteousness (Ps 132:9; Job 29:14), majesty (Ps
93:1), honor and majesty (Ps 104:1; Job 40:10), and salvation (2 Chron 6:41), cf. dishonor
(Ps 109:29) and cursing (Ps 109:18); while the rabbinic literature refers to clothing with
spiritual and ethical qualities, e.g. the Torah clothes with humility and reverence (
6:1; cf. Str-B 2, 301, for further references), which are analogous to Colossians 3:12 and 3:8
(for a discussion see P. W. van der Horst, ―Observations on a Pauline Expression,‖ NTS 19
[1972–73] 181–87.)
    So the Pauline expression is without an exact literal parallel. Also the terms ―the old
man‖ (to;n palaio;n a[nqrwpon) and ―the new (man)‖ (to;n nevon) do not simply describe
an individual‘s condition (e.g. one‘s old, bad character and the new, Christian character),
but also carry corporate associations denoting an old and a new order of existence (Moule,
119, 120; cf. Tannehill, Dying, 25, 50–54; Martin, NCB, 107; Jervell, Imago, 240, states that
―no parallel to this unique concept has been found in non-Christian sources‖ [cf. 240–48 for
his detailed treatment]; neither in Gnostic texts nor in Judaism was there any idea of an
antithesis between the old and the new man—see below.) The ―old man‖ here, as in
Romans 6:6 and Ephesians 4:22, designates the whole personality of man when he is ruled
by sin. At the same time it signifies his belonging to the old humanity in Adam (cf. Larsson,
Christus, 197, and Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 197). Verse 9 speaks of the old man ―with
his deeds‖ (su;n tai`" pravxesin aujtou`) being stripped off. These ―practices‖ (on pra`xi"
see BAG, 697, 698; Maurer, TDNT 6, 642–44) evidently include the two lists of vices in
verses 5 and 8. The connection between the old man and these vices is expressed in another
way at verse 5 where the list of vices stands in apposition to the ―members on earth‖ (ta;
mevlh ta; ejpi; th`" gh`"; cf. Tannehill, Dying, 50). Fornication, covetousness and the like are
―members‖ of the old man (just as the virtues of v 12 might aptly be styled ―members‖ of
the new man). Since the old man and his practices have been put off in Christ‘s death, the
readers are to have no truck with false speaking or any of the other repulsive habits
mentioned.
10. kai; ejndusavmenoi to;n nevon. The new man has been put on in place of the old. The
Greek adjective nevo" (―new‖; cf. BAG, 535, 536; Behm, TDNT 4, 896–901) stands in
contrast to palaiov" (―old‖) and means the same as the synonym kainov" (―new‖; cf. BAG,
394; Behm, TDNT 3, 447–54; older exegetes [notably R. C. Trench, Synonyms of the New
Testament, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1969 = 1880, 219–25] regarded nevo" primarily as a
temporal adjective meaning ―young‖ while kainov" had qualitative connotations: as ―new‖
it actually supplants the old and calls it into question in a qualitative manner. But these
distinctions are difficult to maintain: both terms can imply a qualitative as well as a
temporal significance; here to;n nevon is followed by a compound of kainov"—to;n
ajnkainouvmenon, ―which is being renewed‖—and may have been chosen simply for the
sake of stylistic variety; in the parallel passage of Eph 4:23, 24, conversely the verb
contains nevo" and the adjective is kainov"; cf. R. A. Harrisville, ―The Concept of Newness
in the New Testament,‖ JBL 74 [1955] 69–79; Larsson, Christus, 200; Moule, 119).
     To another group of Christians Paul states: ―as many of you as were baptized into
Christ did put on Christ‖ (Gal 3:27; note the corresponding imperative of Rom 13:14, ―put
on the Lord Jesus Christ‖). Here the ―new man,‖ like its opposite ―the old man,‖ has a
twofold significance—singular and corporate. On the one hand, it has an individual
reference, designating the new nature which the Colossians had put on and which was
continually being renewed (the present participle ajnakainouvmenon indicates an ongoing
process; cf. Rom 12:2) in accordance with the Creator‘s image. The point about the renewal
of the new man is to be compared with what Paul says about the ―inner man‖ (oJ e[sw
a[nqrwpo") of 2 Corinthians 4:16 which is also being renewed from day to day
(ajnakainou`ntai). According to Ephesians 3:16, through a similar process the addressees
are strengthened with power by God‘s Spirit ―for the inner man‖ (eij" to;n e[sw a[nqrwpon;
cf. Rom 7:22). On the other hand, the expression, ―the new man,‖ has a corporate reference
designating the new humanity in Christ. Just as the ―old man‖ is what they once were ―in
Adam,‖ the embodiment of unregenerate humanity, so the ―new man‖ is what they now are
―in Christ,‖ the embodiment of the new humanity. Verse 11 with its statements about the
abolition of racial, religious, cultural and social barriers underscores this corporate aspect
(cf. Schnackenburg, Schriften, 392–411; and for forceful statements in favor of this
corporate emphasis see Robinson, Body, 58–67, and Tannehill, Dying, 25). The renewal
refers not simply to an individual change of character but also to a corporate recreation of
humanity in the Creator‘s image. Christ is the ―new man‖ whom the Colossians have put
on. He is the second Adam, the head of a new creation (cf. 2 Cor 5:17; Gal 6:15).
to;n ajnakainouvmenon eij" ejpivgnwsin kat j eijkovna tou` ktivsanto" anjtovn.
Grammatically it seems best to regard the prepositional phrase kat` eijkovna tou` ktivsanto"
aujtovn (―after the image of its Creator‖) as modifying to;n ajnakainouvmenon (―which is
being renewed‖; cf. Larsson, Christus, 198; this is preferable to its being attached to
ejpivgnwsin, ―knowledge‖: for a discussion of this and other alternatives see Jervell, Imago,
248, 249, and Merk, Handeln, 205). Accordingly, the image of the Creator serves as the
model or archetype for the renewal of the new man—a renewal that has in view the readers‘
progressive increase in true knowledge (Eph 4:24 speaks of the creation of the new man but
not, as does Col 3:10, of its constant renewal).
     katÆ eijkovna tou` ktivsanto" aujtovn. ―After the image of its Creator.‖ Even though this
phrase is not an explicit Scripture citation one cannot miss the allusion to Genesis 1:27,
where the first Adam is said to have been created by God ―in his own image‖ (katÆ eijkovna
qeou`). However, the first Adam is now regarded as the ―old man‖ that has been discarded
so that the believer may put on the new man. Although Chrysostom and some modern
writers regarded the words tou` ktivsauto" as designating Christ as the Creator it is, in fact,
a description of God (cf. Eph 4:24 where it is stated that the new man is created kata; feovn,
lit. ―according to God,‖ or as the RSV puts it ―after the likeness of God‖; in the Pauline
material as well as in the rest of the NT God is the subject of ktivzw, ―create‖: Rom 1:25;
Eph 3:9; cf. 1 Cor 11:9; Eph 2:10; 4:24; 1 Tim 4:3; Matt 19:4; Mark 13:19; 1 Pet 4:19; Rev
4:11; 10:6; while in Col 1:16, as we have already shown, God is the logical subject of the
passive verb ―created,‖ ejktivsqh and e[ktistai; cf. Moule, 120, Jervell, Imago, 249, 250, G.
Delling, ―Partizipiale Gottesprädikationen in den Briefen des Neuen Testaments,‖ ST 17
[1963] 25, Merk, Handeln, 207, Lohse, 143, and Martin, NCB, 107). However, to say that
the new man is being renewed ―according to the image of God,‖ in the light of the hymnic
paragraph where Christ is praised as the eijkwvn (―image‖) of God (1:15; see 42–44) and
Paul‘s Christological teaching elsewhere (Rom 8:29; 1 Cor 15:49; 2 Cor 4:4; and Phil 2:6)
means that God‘s recreation of man ―is in the pattern of Christ, who is God‘s Likeness
absolutely‖ (Moule, 120). This is not at variance with the apostle‘s statements elsewhere
which speak of the Christian‘s transformation into the image of Christ (Rom 8:29; 1 Cor
15:49; 2 Cor 3:18; Phil 3:21), for while the former makes it clear that the redeemed become
the ―new man‖ or kainh; ktivsi" (―new creation‖) to whom the image of Gods—which
Adam lost—has been restored, the latter denotes that this restoration of the divine image is
nothing other than their transformation into the image of Christ (Kim, Paul‘s Gospel, 406,
cf. 295, 296). The expression ―him that created him‖ (aujtovn refers to the ―new man‖) does
not imply that Christ personally is a created being even though he is the new man whom
believers have put on: ―the new man who is created is the new personality that each
believer becomes when he is reborn as a member of the new creation whose source of life
is Christ‖ (Bruce, 273; cf. Larsson, Christus, 209).
     eij" ejpivgnwsin (―in knowledge‖) occurs here in an absolute sense as in Philippians 1:9:
―that your love may abound more and more with knowledge and all discernment.‖ The
renewal of the new man has in view (cf. von Soden, 61) the readers‘ progressive increase in
the ability to recognize God‘s will and command (cf. Col 1:9; see Lohse, 143), something
which the old man did not possess. This true knowledge leads to a conduct that is in
conformity with the Creator‘s will.
11. Within this new humanity (o{pou, a particle denoting place, is here employed
figuratively to denote the circumstances or presupposition of what has gone before = ―in
the realm of the new man,‖ Dibelius-Greeven, 42) the barriers that divided people from one
another—racial, religious, cultural and social—are abolished (Lightfoot, 214, claims that
oujk e[ni means: ―Not only does the distinction not exist, but it cannot exist‖; cf. Martin,
NCB, 108; for a contrary view see Abbott, 285). The theological reason is that ―all were
baptized into the one body—Jews or Greeks, slaves or free‖ (1 Cor 12:13). Elsewhere in
the Pauline letters similar subdivisions of the human family are listed: e.g. Galatians 3:28,
where Paul states that for those who have been baptized into Christ and put on Christ ―there
is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for
you are all one in Christ Jesus‖ (cf. Rom 1:14). Here the teaching of Galatians is repeated
and expanded, no doubt in accordance with the needs of the Colossian readers (so
Lightfoot, 214, 215, Jervell, Imago, 251, and Martin, NCB, 108; against Lohse, 143, who
regards the verse as traditional; Bruce, 275, suggests that the choice of antitheses in Gal
3:28 is made with ―a view to overthrowing the threefold privilege which a pious Jew recalls
morning by morning when he thanks God that He did not make him a Gentile, a slave or a
woman‖). Further, the list of social distinctions mentioned throws light on the kind of
frictions the Christian faith had to overcome (Moule, 121).
    ÓEllhn kai; ÆIoudai`o", peritomh; kai; ajkrobustiva. ―Greek and Jew, circumcised and
uncircumcised.‖ Greeks and Jews are mentioned first in the series to describe the whole of
humanity (cf. 1 Cor. 1:24; 10:32; 12:13; Gal 3:28; Greeks are mentioned as the outstanding
representatives of the Gentiles; on the ―Jew‖ in Paul see Gutbrod, TDNT 3, 380–82, and on
―Greek‖ Windisch, TDNT 2, 512–16). Normally the Jews appear first as an expression of
their privileged place in salvation history. Here the order is reversed, probably because the
majority of the readers were Gentile Christians (cf. 1:21, 22; 2:13). In Christ the old
distinction between Jew and Gentile was abolished—a remarkable achievement of the
gospel. So ―circumcision‖ (Meyer, TDNT 6, 82, 83; Hahn, NIDNTT 1, 307–12) and
―uncircumcision‖ (Schmidt, TDNT 1, 225, 226) have lost their meaning; it is the ―new
creation‖ (kainh; ktivsi", Gal 6:15) that really counts (in both Galatians and Colossians it
was necessary for Paul to underscore the abolition of the distinction between Jew and
Gentile in the light of the Jewish stamp of the teaching he was countering, so Bruce, 275).
bavrbaro", Skuvqh". ―Barbarian, Scythian.‖ The list of terms overlaps somewhat.
―Barbarian‖ (Windisch, TDNT 1, 546–53) and ―Scythian‖ (Michel, TDNT 7, 447–50) are not
contrasted like ―Greek‖ and ―Jew,‖ or ―bondman‖ and ―freeman.‖ Rather, they stand over
against ―Greek‖ when the latter is used in its cultural sense. The ―barbarian‖ (cf. Rom 1:14;
1 Cor 14:11; Acts 28:2, 4) is the non-Greek, who did not speak that language (the Greeks
themselves divided mankind into two main categories—Greeks and barbarians). Yet Paul‘s
apostolic ministry was directed to them both (Rom 1:14, ―I am under obligation to both
Greeks and barbarians [ÔEllhsivn te kai; barbavroi"]‖). The ―Scythian‖ represents the
lowest kind of barbarian who was probably also a slave; the term was applied to tribes
around the Black Sea from which was drawn a wretched slave class (Lightfoot, 216, cf.
BAG, 758; Michel, TDNT 7, 449, 450, suggests the possibility of the Scythian being
mentioned separately from the barbarian because of some special situation at Colossae; but
against this see Lohse, 144). Josephus (Ap 2, 269) said: ―they are little better than wild
beasts‖ (they were occasionally figures of fun in Greek comedy because of their uncouth
ways and speech, cf. Bruce, 276). But the gospel breaks down these cultural barriers,
overcoming the offense which a Scythian might give to another‘s natural sensibilities.
    dou`lo", ejleqvuero". ―Slave, free.‖ Likewise ―in the realm of the new man‖
(Dibelius-Greeven, 42) distinctions of social position are irrelevant. A slave in the ancient
world was, legally speaking, not a person but a piece of property, ―a living tool‖ according
to Aristotle (see below regarding Paul‘s treatment of Onesimus). But in the Christian
community the slave as well as the freeman was the brother for whom Christ died. The
apostle is not speaking about some natural equality of all persons nor about a morality that
is binding on all. When in Galatians 3:28 he says that in Christ ―there is no male or female‖
he does not mean that the distinctive functions or capacities of men and women are
abolished, for they like Greeks and Jews, slaves and free, continue to live in the various
roles the word assigns them (see Bouttier, NTS 23 [1976–77] 1–19). But in Christ there is no
inferiority of the one sex to the other, or one class to another; men and women of
completely diverse origins are gathered together in unity in Christ through a common
allegiance to their Lord. There is no difference in spiritual status between them.
ajlla; »ta;¼ pavnta kai; ejn pa`sin Cristov". The concluding triumphant words, ―but Christ
is all and in all,‖ contrast the centrality of Christ with the divisions that separate people in
the world. Similar expressions are found at 1 Corinthians 15:28 (―that God may be all in
all‖) and Ephesians 1:23 (―the fullness of him who fills all in all‖) where, in the former at
least and possibly also the latter, the relationship of God himself to the cosmos is in view.
Here, however, the phrase is applied to Christ. The kaiv (―and‖) suggests that both halves of
the phrase are important (note Eph 4:6). The first half states in an emphatic way that Christ
is ―absolutely everything‖ (see Moule, 121, 122), or ―all that matters,‖ while the words he
is ―in all‖ (ejn pa`sin), which in the light of the preceding statement of verse 11a should
probably be regarded as masculine (rather than neuter), mean that he permeates and
indwells all members of the new man, regardless of race, class or background (cf.
Schnackenburg, Schriften, 408, and Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 159; note however Lohse,
145). Christ lives in those who believe (cf. Col 1:27; Gal 2:20; 4:19).

Explanation
Paul‘s previous exhortations to the Colossians to aim at the things above (3:1–4), which
were based on their union with Christ in his death and resurrection, find concrete
expression and application in the further injunctions which follow: ―put to death‖ (v 5),
―put away‖ (v 8; cf. ―do not lie,‖ v 9) and ―put on‖ (v 12). The first of these imperatives
(―put to death‖) recalls the union with Christ in his death (2:20; 3:3; cf. 2:11, 12): because
they have died with him, then they are to put to death whatever belongs to their earthly
nature. Five sins are identified with these earthly members as the apostle describes first the
outward manifestations of sin (―sexual immorality‖ or ―fornication‖) and then the inward
cravings of the heart (―ruthless greed‖), the acts of immorality and uncleanness and then
their inner springs. Here Paul employs the first of two catalogs of vices, similar to those
found among pagan moralists and in the anti-pagan polemic of Jewish propagandists (the
second series of five appears in verse 8, while five graces, which the readers are to put on
like new clothing, follow in verse 12). Here, as often elsewhere, the list of pagan sins is set
within the context of God‘s judgment: ―on account of such the wrath of God is coming‖ (v
6). By means of a preaching form, the ―once-now‖ antithesis of verses 7 and 8, the readers
are shown how they ought to behave now in contrast to their pagan past. They are to
discard their old repulsive habits of improper speech like a set of worn-out clothes. The
twofold reason for this abandonment of evil ways is that: (a) they have already put off the
old man with his practices (v 9), and (b) have put on the new man which is being renewed
in the Creator‘s image (v 10). The expressions, the old man and the new, carry both
individual and corporate connotations: the former designates the whole personality of man
when he is ruled by sin, at the same time signifying his belonging to the old humanity in
Adam. The latter also has an individual reference, designating the new nature which the
Colossians had put on and which was continually being renewed in accordance with the
creator‘s image. At the same time the new man has a corporate reference, denoting the new
humanity in Christ. Within this realm of the new man there is no inferiority of one class to
another; men and women of completely diverse origins are gathered together in unity in
Christ, sharing a common allegiance to their Lord. Christ is all that matters; he permeates
and indwells all members of his body, regardless of race, class or background.
Put on the Graces of Christ (3:12–17)
Bibliography
Jervell, J. Imago, 249–256. Larsson, E. Christus, 210–23. Merk, O. Handeln, 210–14. Schrage,
W. Einzelgebote. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene, 66–68. (See also the bibliography to 3:5–11
concerning the New Testament lists of sins and graces.)

Translation
12
   Therefore, as God‘s chosen ones, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with heartfelt
compassion, kindness, lowliness, gentleness and longsuffering. 13 Bear with one another
and forgive each other if one has a complaint against another; as the Lorda has graciously
forgiven you, so you should also forgive one another. 14 In addition to all these graces put
on love which is the bond that leads to perfection. 15Let Christ‘s peace rule in your hearts.
It was also to this peace that you were called in one body. And be thankful. 16Let the Word
of Christb dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another in all wisdom by
means of Spirit-inspired psalms, hymns and songs, singing thankfully to Godc with your
whole being. 17And whatever you do in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Fatherd through him.

Notes.
    13.a. The reading kuvrio" (―Lord‖) which has the strong support of P46 as well as the
best witnesses of both the Alexandrian and Western texts (A B D* G itd,g vg etc) was
interpreted, quite correctly, by copyists as Cristov" (―Christ‖). But the latter is not the
original reading; nor are the other variants (feov", ―God,‖ and feo;" ejn Cristw`/, ―God in
Christ‖) which seem to be scribal assimilations to Ephesians 4:32 (Metzger, Textual
Commentary, 625; cf. Moule, 123, and Lohse, 148).
   16.b. In place of the unusual expression ―the Word of Christ,‖ several witnesses
substitute the more customary ―the Word of God‖ or ―the Word of the Lord.‖ In addition
Cristou` (―of Christ‖) has the strong support of P46 a
      c B C2 D G
                      etc
   16.c. The Textus Receptus in accordance with Ephesians 5:19 reads tw`/ kurivw/ (―to the
Lord‖). But the early and widespread manuscript evidence is in favor of tw`/ uew`/ (―to God‖:
P46
      a
          A B C* D*
             etc).
17.d. The unusual expression of tw`/ qew`/ patriv (―to God the Father‖), which has
widespread support P46 (apparently) a
 A B C
       81 etc, was emended by copyists who inserted kaiv (―and‖) to bring it into line with
Ephesians 5:20 (note 1:3 and 12).

Form/Structure/Setting
      With the introductory imperative of verse 12, ejnduvsasqe (―put on‖), which governs the
sentence structure to verse 13c, the positive exhortation begins; it stands in contrasting
parallelism with the preceding section, verses 5–11, which also began with an aorist
imperative (nekrwvsate, ―put to death‖), the conjunction ou\n (―therefore‖) and a list of five
items. This positive exhortatory material naturally falls into two sections: (a) verses 12–14,
and (b) verses 15–17. In the former the imperatival sentence contains a fivefold catalog of
virtues (v 12) which stands in contrast to the fivefold vice catalog of the preceding
paragraph (vs 5, 8). The imperative is continued in the two parallel participial clauses (v
13a, ajnecovmenoi ajllhvlwn, ―forbearing one another,‖ and v 13b, carizovmenoi eJautoi`",
―forgiving each other‖) with which is linked a conditional sentence (v 13c, eJavn ti" prov"
tina e[ch/ momfhvn, ―if one has a complaint against another‖). The remainder of verse 13,
with its balancing kauwv" … ou{tw" construction (―as … so‖) sets forth the motive for
mutual forgiveness—the activity of the Lord who has first forgiven them. Finally, verse 14,
which appears to be dependent on the introductory imperative, ejnduvsasue (―put on‖ of v
12), speaks of ajgavph (―love‖) as the bond that leads to perfection. The structure may be set
forth as follows:


12a
ejnduvsasqe ou\n wJ" ejklektoi; tou` qeou` …

b
splavgcna oijktirmou`

c
crhstovthta—tapeinofrosuvnhn

d
prau\thta—makroqumivan

13a
ajnecovmenoi ajllhvlwn

b
kai; carizovmwnoi eJautoi`",

c
ejavn ti" prov" tina e[ch/ momxhvn.

d
kaqw;" kai; oJ kuvrio" ejcarivsato uJmi`n—

e
ou{tw" kai; uJmei`".

14a
ejpi; pa`sin de; touvtoi" th;n ajgavphn,
b
o{ ejstin suvdesmo" th`" teleiovthto".

12a
―Clothe yourselves, therefore, as God‘s chosen ones …

b
heartfelt compassion

c
kindness—lowliness

d
gentleness—longsuffering

13a
Bear with one another

b
and forgive each other,

c
if one has a complaint against another.

d
As the Lord has graciously forgiven you—

e
so you too (should forgive).

14a
In addition to all these (put on) love,

b
which is the bond that leads to perfection.‖

    The second section, comprising verses 15–17, stands as a unity. Verse 15 contains three
clauses each of which is, in effect, introduced by kaiv (―and‖): a cohortative clause, kai; hJ
eijrhvnh tou` Cristou` brabeuevtw … (v 15a, ―and let the peace of Christ rule …‖); a
dependent relative clause, eij" h]n kai; ejklhvqhte (v 15b, ―into which also you were called
…‖); and a short, independent imperatival clause, kai; eujcavristoi givnesqe (v 15c, ―and
be thankful‖). Verse 16, like the preceding verse, commences with a cohortative clause, oJ
lovgo" tou` Cristou` ejnoikeivtw … (―let the word of Christ dwell…‖). It is followed by
three participles didavskonte", nouqetou`nte" and a[/donte" (―teaching,‖ ―admonishing‖
and ―singing‖). The concluding verse contains a relative clause (pa`n o{ ti, ―whatever‖)
with a condition inserted (eja;n poih`te, ―if you do‖), a principal clause (pavnta (poiei`te)
ejn ojnovmati …, ―do all in the name of …‖) and a participial construction
(eujcaristou`nte" tw`/ qew`/ …, ―giving thanks to God …‖). Verses 15–17 may be structured
as follows:


15a
kai; hJ eijrhvnh tou` Cristou` brabeuevtw …

b
eij" h{n kai; ejklhvqhte …

c
kai; eujcavristoi givnesqe

16a
oJ lovgo" tou` Cristou` ejnoikei`tw …

b
ejn pavsh/ sofiva/ didavskonte" kai; nounetou`nte" …

c
ejn th`/ cavriti a[/donte" …

17a
kai; pa`n o{ ti eja;n poih`te …

b
pavnta ejn ojnovmati tou` kurivou Æ Ihsou`

c
eujcaristou`nte" tw`/ qew`/ patri; di jaujtou`.

15a
―And let Christ‘s peace rule …

b
into which also you were called …

c
And be thankful.

16a
Let the word of Christ dwell in …

b
in all wisdom teaching and admonishing …

c
singing with thanksgiving …

17a
And whatever you do …

b
[do] all in the name of the Lord Jesus

c
giving thanks to God the Father through him.

(

Comment
12. ejnduvsasqe ou\n. As God‘s chosen ones who have already put on the new man (v 10)
they must don the graces which are characteristic of him. In the preceding paragraph the
apostle had set forth the negative requirements in the admonitions ―put to death‖ (v 5) and
―put off‖ (v 8); here he spells out the positive exhortation which, like the injunction of
verse 5 with its ou\n (―therefore‖), follows as a direct consequence (ou\n, ―therefore‖) of
what has previously been said. The graces with which they are to be clothed are those
qualities predicated of God or Christ (note the treatments of Larsson, Christus, 210–20, and
Jervell, Imago, 251, 252). It is, thus, not unusual that Paul should exhort the Roman
Christians to ―put on (ejnduvsasqe) the Lord Jesus Christ‖ (Rom 13:14). The imperative
ejnduvsasqe (―put on‖), like its counterpart in verses 5 (nekrwvsate, ―put to death‖) and 8
(ajpovuesqe, ―put off‖) is an aorist tense signifying a decisive initial act which introduces a
settled attitude (Schweizer, 153).
    wJ" ejklektoi; tou` qeou`, a{gioi kai hjgaphmevnoi. ―As elect of God, holy and be-loved.‖
The members of the congregation are addressed by means of exalted titles: they are the
chosen, holy and beloved people of God. These descriptions are important not only because
they were used of Israel as God‘s own possession—and as Lightfoot, 219, claimed are now
transferred to the Colossians as the new people of God—but also since they are designated
of Christ, thereby underlining the point of their similarity to and identification with him,
features that are all the more significant in a context where they are encouraged to put on
his graces. ejlektov" (―chosen,‖ ―elect‖; BAG, 242, Schrenk, TDNT 4, 181–92; cf. G. Delling,
―Merkmale der Kirche nach den Neuen Testament,‖ NTS 13 [1966–67] 305) was employed
in the LXX of men of God in salvation history (Num 11:28; Ps 105:23, etc), the land of
Palestine (Jer 3:19; Zech 7:14), the city of Jerusalem (Tob 13:13) and Israel as the people
of God (Isa 43:20; 65:9, 15, 23; Pss 104:43; 105:5, etc: cf. Schrenk, TDNT 4, 182, 183).
Although the word-group (including ejklevgomai, ―choose,‖ and ejklektov", ―chosen‖)
occurs relatively infrequently in the New Testament (in Paul ejklektov", ―elect,‖ ―chosen,‖
is found at Rom 8:33; 16:13; Col 3:12; 1 Tim 5:21; 2 Tim 2:10; and Titus 1:1; ejkloghv,
―election,‖ at Rom 9:11; 11:5, 7, 28; and 1 Thess 1:4; and ejklevgomai, ―choose,‖ at 1 Cor
1:27, 28 and Eph 1:4) in comparison with the LXX (where ejklejgomai, ―choose,‖ and
ejklektov", ―elect,‖ turn up 245 times), ejklektov" is used of Christ as the ―elect one‖ (Luke
23:35; cf. 9:35; John 1:34; 1 Pet 2:4, 6) as well as of the Christian community: ―But you are
a chosen race (gejno" ejklektovn), a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God‘s own people,‖ 1
Peter 2:9.
Believers are ―God‘s elect‖ (ejklektoi; qeou`) against whom he will never lay any charge for
it is he who justifies them (Rom 8:33). This term, together with others akin to it (e.g. the
kalejw group with reference to ―calling‖), emphasizes the gracious initiative of God in
drawing men and women to himself (the Qumran community regarded itself as the
assembly of the chosen ones: 1QpHab 10:13, ―God‘s elect‖; cf. 5:4; 1QH 14:15; &4QpPs;
37.2.5, ―the community of his elect‖). The parallel terms a{gioi (―holy‖) and hjgaphmejnoi
(―beloved‖) are best taken as predicates of ejklektoiv (―elect‖; against Lohmeyer, 145,
ejklektoiv does not designate the heavenly ―communion of saints‖ and so the ―angels,‖ and
wJ", ―as,‖ is not meant to distinguish Christians from them as another group; rather it simply
emphasizes the Colossians‘ identity with the elect; so Larsson, Christus, 210, Lohse, 146,
Martin, NCB, 109): his choice souls are those whom he has set apart for himself and placed
his love upon them (so Abbott, 286, Procksch, TDNT 1, 107; cf. Delling, NTS 13 [1966–67]
305, and Lohse, 146). Again it is important to note that a{lio" (―holy‖; see on chap. 1:2) is
employed of Jesus as the ―Holy One‖ (Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34; John 6:69; cf. Acts 4:27, 30)
while ajgaphtov" (―beloved,‖ is akin to the sparsely used ajgaphmevno" which appears at 1
Thess 1:4 and 2 Thess 2:13 in the context of election and describes Christians as ―beloved
by God‖) turns up in the Gospels as a messianic designation for Jesus (Matt 3:17 and
parallels; 12:18; 17:5 and parallels).
     splavgcna oijktirmou` crhstovthta, tapeinofrosuvnhn, prau`vthta, makroqumivan.
―Heartfelt compassion, kindness, lowliness, gentleness, longsuffering.‖ In verses 5 to 8 two
catalogs were listed, each enumerating five vices that were to be put away with the old
man. Now five virtues, which are not strictly opposites of the preceding vices, are to be put
on. These are elsewhere designated as the graces and actions of God or Christ. splavgcna
oijktirrmou` means ―heartfelt compassion‖ (BAG, 561; lit. ―bowels of compassion,‖
oijktirmou` is a genitive of quality) and appears first, oijktirmov" (Bultmann, TDNT 5,
159–61, Esser, NIDNTT 2, 598) in the LXX is predicated first and foremost of God who is
described as ―compassionate‖: he has acted graciously and compassionately on behalf of
his people (LXX Pss 24:6; 50:1; 102:4; 144:9; cf. Neh 9:19, 27, 28, etc; the plural is
normally used, perhaps partly to describe concrete acts of compassion [so BDF, para. 142;
Robertson, Grammar, 408], but no doubt due to the influence of the Hebrew  as
well; there is no difference in meaning with the singular. Also cf. LXX Exod 34:6; 2 Chron
30:9; Neh 9:17, 31; Pss 85:15; 102:8; 110:4; 144:8; Joel 2:13; and Jon 4:2, where the
adjective oijktovrmwn, ―compassionate,‖ ―merciful,‖ makes the same point about God‘s
gracious actions). In the Qumran literature ―mercies‖ (Hebrew ) first of all describe
God‘s compassion (1QS 1:22; 1QH 1:31; 1QM 11:4) though as in the OT the term can also
refer to the godly person who lives according to God‘s will (note especially 1QS 4:3 in a list
of virtues describing the behavior of the new people of God; cf. 2 Chron 30:9; Ps 106:46).
oijktirmoiv (―mercies‖) in the NT describes God‘s compassion: at Romans 12:1 it denotes
his concrete acts of mercy in his Son, while at 2 Corinthians 1:3 as the ―Father of mercies‖
(path;r tw`n oijktirmw`n) he is the ―compassionate Father‖ (a genitive of quality), and the
―Father from whom all compassion comes‖ (a genitive of origin), cf. O‘Brien, Introductory
Thanksgivings, 241, 242; note also Luke 6:36; James 5:11.
splavgcnon (almost always in the plural, meaning literally ―inward parts,‖ BAG, 763; cf.
Köster, TDNT 7, 548–59, Esser, NIDNTT 2, 599, 600) comes to be used figuratively of the
seat of the emotions, i.e. the ―heart.‖ In fact, like other anthropological terms the word is
found in Paul for the whole man, expressing strongly and forcefully what concerns the
personality at the deepest level, especially in his capacity of loving (Köster, TDNT 7, 555;
note the references in Philemon, vv 7, 12, 20). The few references to splavgcna and the
cognate verb splagcnivzomai (―have pity,‖ ―feel sympathy‖) in the LXX occur mostly in
the later books where there is no Hebrew original. The predominant meaning ―merciful,‖
―show mercy,‖ is found in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs and this prepares the
way for the NT usage. The love of God is signified in these Testaments by both noun (T.
Levi 4:4, T. Zeb 8:2; T. Napht. 4:5) and verb (T. Zeb 8:1). The NT tendency is to employ both
terms of God or Christ. So in the Synoptics the verb splagcnivzomai describes (a) the
attitude of Jesus as it characterizes the divine nature of his acts (Matt 9:36; 14:14; Mark
1:41; 9:22; Luke 7:13), and (b) the actions of key persons in three of Jesus‘ parables (Matt
18:27; Luke 10:33; 15:20) who make the unbounded mercy of God visibly plain, while at
Philippians 1:8 where the noun is employed (ejn splavgcnoi" Cristou` jIhsou`, ―with the
affection of Christ Jesus‖), Christ is seen to be ―the source of the love that embraces and
lays claim to the apostle‘s whole personality‖ (Esser, NIDNTT 2, 600; cf. Phil 2:1; and Luke
1:78, ―through the tender mercy [dia; splavgcna ejlejou"] of our God‖). In this context of
Colossians the joint expression means ―a compassionate heart‖ or ―merciful compassion‖
(it is not necessary to posit a literary dependence on ―affection and compassion‖
[splavgcna kai; oijktirmoiv of Phil 2:1; the almost identical phrase ―heart of mercy‖ is used
at Luke 1:78; cf. T. Zeb 7:3).
     crhstovth", (―goodness,‖ ―kindness,‖ ―generosity,‖ BAG, 886; Weiss, TDNT 9, 483–92;
Beyreuther, NIDNTT 2, 105, 106) is a quality which God himself demonstrates in concrete
actions. Both noun and cognate adjective (crhstovh", ―good,‖ ―kind‖) are favorite words in
the LXX for expressing the abundance of his goodness which he displays to his covenant
people—indeed to all men as his creatures. His constant mercy and readiness to help are
essential themes of the psalms (e.g. Pss 25[LXX 24]:7; 31[30]:19; 65[64]:11; 68[67]:10;
85[84]:12) as well as in the prophets where the kindness of God is all the more amazing in
the face of his people‘s sin (Jer 33[LXX 40]:11; cf. 24:2, 3, 5). In the Qumran literature the
sect expected its members show mercy to one another thereby reflecting the kindness each
had received from God (1QH 7:30; 10:16; 11:6, 9, 31; 12:21; 13:16 with 1QS 4:3). The
predominant number of NT references to the word-group appear in the Pauline letters (the
adjective crhstov", ―kind,‖ ―good,‖ occurs at Matt 11:30; Luke 5:39 and 6:35; all other
instances are in Paul) where the apostle turns repeatedly to the incomprehensible kindness
of God: crhstovth" denotes God‘s gracious attitude and acts toward sinners. He desires the
salvation of the sinner, not his death (Rom 11:22; Eph 2:7; Tit 3:4), while his kindness and
forbearance are designed to lead the impenitent to repentance (so Rom 2:4). As a response
to God‘s merciful kindness the person who has put on the new man, the Lord Jesus Christ,
is to show kindness to others. This does not come naturally; nor can it be produced from
one‘s innate ability. Along with ―patience‖ it is a fruit of the Spirit (Gal 5:22), and
according to 1 Corinthians 13:4 is a direct outworking of love (itself a fruit of the Spirit):
―love is patient and kind.‖
tapeinofrosuvnh has already been used twice in the letter (2:18, 23) by the Colossian
opponents to denote ―mortification,‖ ―self-denial‖ or even ascetic practices such as fasting
that were a prelude to receiving visions of the heavenly mysteries (see 142, 153). Here,
however, it signifies the grace of ―lowliness,‖ ―humility‖ (BAG, 804; cf. Grundmann, TDNT
8, 21–23, Esser, NIDNTT 2, 259–64). It is well-known that in profane Greek literature the
term occurs on only a few occasions, and then usually in a derogatory sense of servility,
weakness or a shameful lowliness. In the OT although the noun tapeinofrosuvnh
(―humility‖) is lacking, tapeinov" (―lowly,‖ ―humble‖) and its cognates turn up about 270
times. Particularly significant are those references to the Lord‘s acting in history to bring
down the proud and arrogant and to exalt the lowly: (a) the prophets express it in warnings
of judgment (Amos 2:6, 7, 13; 8:6, 7; cf. Isa 2:9, 11, 17; 5:15; Zeph 2:3; 3:12, etc), (b) the
historical books spell it out with reference to events (Judg 4:23; 6:15; 1 Sam 1:11, 16; 7:13;
2 Sam 22:28, etc), (c) the psalmists express the theme in their prayers (Pss 10:17, 18 [LXX
9:38, 39]; 25:18 [24:18]; 31:7 [30:8], etc), while (d) in proverbs of the wisdom literature
―humility‖ is spoken of as the fruit of experience and as a rule of life (Job 5:11; Prov 3:34;
11:2; 15:33, in some manuscripts ―humility‖ is parallel with ―the fear of the Lord‘‖ 16:2,
19, etc; for further references see Esser, NIDNTT 2, 260, 261). In the NT tapeinofrosuvnh
signifies the ―lowliness‖ with which one serves Christ (Acts 20:19) or is submissive to
other Christians (Eph 4:2; Phil 2:3; 1 Pet 5:5). The pattern or model is Jesus who invited
people to come to him as the one who is ―meek and lowly (tapeinov") in heart‖ (Matt
11:29). The twin themes of humiliation and exaltation, noted in the OT material, come to
their clearest expression in the hymn of Philippians 2:6–11 where it is stated that Jesus
humbled himself (ejtapeivnwsen eJautovn, v 8) even to death on a cross and God exalted
him (v 9), bestowing on him the name above every name. The hymn provides the basis for
the preceding exhortation (2:1–5), and Christ‘s action in humbling himself is the pattern for
believers who, in humility (th`/ tapeinoyrosuvnh/, v 3), are to esteem others better than
themselves and to be concerned about others‘ welfare (v 4).
       prau`vth" (―gentleness, ―humility, ―meekness, BAG, 699; cf. Hauck/Schulz, TDNT 6,
645–51, Bauder, NIDNTT 2, 256–59) turns up in the Pauline writings of the NT some eight
times (1 Cor 4:21; 10:1; Gal 5:23; 6:1; Eph 4:2; Col 3:12; 2 Tim 2:25; Tit 3:2; in addition it
occurs at James 1:21; 3:13; 1 Pet 3:15) but the cognate adjective prau`v" (―meek,‖ which is
found at Matt 5:5; 11:29; 21:5; 1 Pet 3:4) does not appear in Paul. Like the earlier terms
this word-group needs to be understood against an OT background. In the LXX our terms
were used to designate the poor in Israel, those without landed property, many of whom
were victims of unscrupulous exploitation (Isa 32:7; Ps 37:14; Job 24:4). The ―poor‖ (Heb .
) are the defenseless, those without rights, who are oppressed, cheated and exploited (cf.
 Pss 9, 10). However, Yahweh is the God of those without rights (Pss 25:9; 149:4; 34:2); he
 comforts those who find no mercy from their fellow-men (Isa 29:19; Job 36:15) and will
 finally reverse all that is against them (Isa 26:6; Ps 37:11; 147:6). The term ―poor‖ comes
 to be applied to those who in deep need humbly seek help from Yahweh alone (e.g. Ps
 40:17; Zeph 2:3; 3:12; Isa 41:17, etc). At Zechariah 9:9 the term prau`v" (―meek‖) is a title
 of honor given to the Messiah. ―Meekness‖ is one of the marks of Jesus‘ rule. He fulfills
 the role of the messianic king who brings salvation without using force (Matt 21:5 = Zech
 9:9), describing himself as ―meek‖ (prau`v", Matt 11:29). Paul mentions the ―meekness of
 Christ‖ (prau`vth" … tou` Cristou`, 2 Cor 10:1) as characteristic of Jesus‘ behavior toward
 men during his life on earth, and exhorts the Corinthians on the basis of this example.
 ―Meekness‖ is to characterize the lives of Christians in relation to fellow-believers who
 have sinned (Gal 6:1, 2, by bearing one another‘s burdens they ―fulfill the law of Christ‖; 2
 Tim 2:25, cf. 1 Cor 4:21), as well as outsiders (Tit 3:2; cf. Phil 4:5). It is a fruit of the Spirit
 (Gal 5:23) standing in lists of graces as a concrete expression of Christian love (cf . 1 Tim
 6:11; 1 Pet 3:4). This gentleness is not to be confused with weakness (as contemporary
Hellenistic thought understood it), but contains the elements of (a) a consideration for
others, and (b) a willingness to waive one‘s rights (cf. Martin, NCB, 111).
    makroqumiva. (In addition to the treatment at chap. 1:11 see Horst, TDNT 4, 374–87,
Falkenroth and Brown, NIDNTT 2, 768–72). It denotes that ―longsuffering‖ which endures
wrong and puts up with the exasperating conduct of others rather than flying into a rage or
desiring vengeance (cf. L. H. Marshall, The Challenge of New Testament Ethics [London:
Macmillan, 1947] 294, cited by Martin, NCB, 111).
Each of the five graces with which God‘s elect are to be clothed show how Christians
should behave in their dealings with others, particularly with fellow-believers.
    13. The exhortation continues with the two participles ajnecovmenoi (―bear with‖) and
carizovmenoi (―forgive‖; on the imperatival use of the participle see on 3:9), while the
reason or justification for such a conciliatory attitude is: ―the Lord has forgiven you.‖ The
exercise of forbearance (ajnevcomai means ―endure,‖ ―bear with,‖ ―put up with,‖ so BAG,
65) by Christians toward ―one another‖ (ajllhvlwn, in the genitive case after a verb of
emotion, so BDF, para. 176[1]; Robertson, Grammar, 508, indicates that putting up with
other members of the congregation is in view) results from their being clothed with
―longsuffering‖ (makroqumiva, v 12; according to Lohmeyer, 146, the fivefold list of v 12 is
a unity which is tied in with the two admonitions of v 13).That forbearance is to be
continual (the verb ajnevcomai has a linear connotation while the present tense shows it is
ongoing) and reciprocal (cf. Eph 4:2; see also 2 Cor 11 where the note of mutual
forbearance is struck several times: vv 1 [twice], 4, 19, 20; cf. Falkenroth and Brown,
NIDNTT 2, 765, 766). In addition, believers‘ relationships (although it is possible Paul has
in mind a concrete situation in the Colossian church, the reference is probably more
general; cf. Lohse, 147, 148, and Martin, NCB, 112) with each other (eJautoi`"; older
commentators drew a distinction here between ajllhvlwn, ―one another,‖ and eJautoi`",
―each other,‖ although the significance of the distinction varied; but there does not seem to
be any difference in meaning: the change is for the sake of stylistic variety, cf . BDF, para.
287, and Robertson, Grammar, 690) should be characterized by mutual forgiveness,
carivzomai (―give freely or graciously as a favor,‖ ―give‖ = ―remit,‖ ―forgive,‖ ―pardon,‖
BAG, 876, 877, and note Conzelmann, TDNT 9, 372–402) is not the common word for
remission or forgiveness (which is ajfivhmi, ―cancel,‖ ―remit,‖ or ―pardon‖), but one of
richer content emphasizing the gracious nature of the pardon (at Luke 7:42 in our Lord‘s
parable of the two debtors the AV renders the word ―frankly forgave‖; it is found elsewhere
in the Pauline corpus of God‘s gracious giving or forgiving at Rom 8:32; 1 Cor 2:12; Gal
3:18; Eph 4:32; Phil 1:29; 2:9; Col 2:13; note also 2 Cor 2:7, 10; 12:13; Philem 22). The
present tense of the verb (carizovmenoi) makes it plain that this forgiveness is to be
unceasing, even unwearying (a point which Jesus himself taught when instructing his
disciples that forgiveness ought to be ―until seventy times seven,‖ Matt 18:22; cf. vv
21–35), while the conditional sentence, ―if one has a complaint against another‖ (ejavn ti"
prov" tina e{ch/ momfhvn), recognizes that within the congregation there will be grounds for
grievance from time to time (momfhv, ―blame,‖ ―cause for complaint,‖ BAG, 527, cf.
Grundmann, TDNT 4, 571–74, appears only here in the Greek Bible, occurring elsewhere
only rarely and in poetry). ―One against another‖ (ti" prov" tina) is a generalreference
suggesting that legitimate complaints might be directed by any member of the community
against any other. But whenever these grievances arise the readers are to forgive.
    The ground and motivation for this response are of the highest order: ―as the Lord has
forgiven you, so you should also forgive one another‖ kaqw;" kai; oJ kuvrio" ejcarivsato
uJmi`n ou`vtw" kai; uJmei`". The two halves of this sentence, as noted above, are balanced by
an ―as … so‖ construction (kaqw;" kai; … ou`vtw" kaiv) which is paralleled elsewhere in
Paul‘s letters (Rom 15:7, 8; Eph 5:2, 25, 29; cf. Rom 15:3; Mark 10:45; 1 Pet 2:21; 3:18).
This is part of what has been described as his ―conformity‖-teaching in which the full
impact of Christ‘s sacrifice on the cross is set forth as a paradigm of the life style to which
the believer ―conforms‖—it is not simply Christ‘s human life which is a model to be
imitated by following in his earthly steps (the ―imitatio‖ of later piety). cf. Dahl, Jesus, 34,
35, and Martin, NCB, 112. Because Christ has forgiven us we ought to forgive one another.
kuvrio" (―Lord‖) is the better attested reading (see above) and refers to Christ himself rather
than God (so Lohse, 148, against Ernst, 228, and Merk, Handeln, 211, who incorrectly
appeals to 1:10 in support of the view that kuvrio" is a reference to ―God‖). It is a singular
expression, however, for usually it is God who is said to forgive: so Colossians 2:13 and
the parallel passage, Ephesians 4:32, ―God in Christ forgave you.‖ Clearly Christ‘s mighty
work of reconciliation (1:22) is the basis on which that forgiveness of sins is provided. And
here the apostle reproduces Jesus‘ insistence on the close connection between divine
forgiveness of us and our forgiveness of others (cf. the Lord‘s Prayer, Matt 6:12 and Luke
11:4).
     14. Finally, ―love‖ is the crowning grace which the new man has to put on as part of his
distinctive dress (ajgavphn, ―love,‖ is another object of the imperative ejnduvsasqe, ―put on,‖
v 12). If each of the graces previously mentioned was seen to be characteristic of God or
Christ then this is preeminently so of ajgavph (―love‖), as a concordance will quickly show,
and one needs only to refer to 1 Corinthians 13:4 in support for this statement about love so
clearly reflects the character of Christ (Larsson, Christus, 221, 222). ―Above all‖ (ejpi;
pa`sin de; touvtoi") may convey the idea of ―on top of all the other ‗articles of clothing‘ ‖
(so Moule, 123. BDF, para. 235[3], and Robertson, Grammar, 605, agree that here the
preposition ejpiv with the dative means ―in addition to‖). Elsewhere the apostle asserts that
―love‖ is the motive power of faith (Gal 5:6); according to 1 Corinthians 13:13 it is the
supreme Christian grace, while at Romans 13:9, 10 all the commandments are summed up
in the one commandment, ―you shall love your neighbor as yourself.‖ ―Love‖ is the
fulfilling of the law (plhvrwma novmou) because it does nothing but good to a neighbor.
But what is meant by the explanatory clause, ―[love] which is the bond of perfection
(suvndesmo" th`" teleiovthto")‖? (The explanatory phrase o`v ejstin, ―which is,‖ as a
special idiom is used without much regard to the gender or number of either antecedent [hJ
ajgavph] or predicate [suvndemo"], so Robertson, Grammar, 411, 703, and BDF, para.
132[2]; note also 1:24, 27; 2:10, 17.) The word suvndesmo" (a ―bond‖ that holds something
together [so BAG, 785] is used of the sinews of the body at Col 2:19) has been taken by
some as the link which unites and binds together all the previously mentioned graces of
verse 12, so producing the fullness of Christian living. It is the ―perfect bond‖ (th`"
teleiovthto", ―of perfection,‖ is regarded as a qualitative or descriptive genitive) which
joins all the other virtues to form an organic unity. Commentators who advocate this line
point out that the Pythagoreans regarded ―friendship‖ (filiva) in much the same way. It was
much more highly honored than any other quality being called the ―bond of all the virtues‖
(suvndesmon … pasw`n tw`n ajretw`n, Simplicius‘ saying in Epictet, p. 208; cf. Plato, Polit
310a for suvndesmo" ajreth`", ―the bond of virtue,‖ which Fitzer, TDNT 7, 859, claims has
formal similarities with Col 3:14. Note also BAG, 785, Moule, 123, 124, and Bruce, 281).
But it is doubtful whether this is what the apostle meant. Nowhere else does he regard love
as a uniting force linking other virtues, and this thought is not found in other N T statements
about love.In addition, questions have been raised about the relevance of the extrabiblical
parallels (Du Plessis, Perfection, 201, rightly notes that Paul was not a champion of a
hierarchy of virtues, of which he conceived love to be the supreme or dominating principle;
cf. Percy, Probleme, 407, and Schmauch, 80–82). Consequently an alternative
interpretation has been proposed, that is, to regard the genitive ―of perfection‖ (th`"
teleiovthto") as one of purpose, so meaning that love is the bond that leads to perfection
(A. Fridrichsen, ―Charité et perfection. Observation sur Col. 3, 14,‖ SO 19 [1939] 41–45,
Percy, Probleme, 407, Dibelius-Greeven, 44. Several consider the genitive to be objective,
but the significance is the same = ―the bond which produces perfection,‖ so BDF, para. 163,
Turner, Syntax, 212, Delling, TDNT 8, 79, Du Plessis, Perfection, 201, Larson, Christus,
221. For a full discussion see Schmauch, 80–82). Love binds together the members of the
congregation (rather than the graces previously mentioned) into unity in the body of Christ
(the variant reading th`" eJnovthto", ―of unity,‖ though secondary, captures the apostle‘s
thought) so producing perfection (Lohse, 149). Paul is concerned with the readers‘
corporate life and the perfection he sets before them is not something narrowly individual.
It is attained only as Christians, in fellowship, show love to one another. It is by this love,
one of thegraces of Christ, that his body is built up.
     15. From love Paul passes on to peace (at Eph 4:3 peace rather than love is the ―bond,‖
suvndesmo", in which the unity of the Spirit is to be maintained), and in so doing leaves
behind the motifs of the old man and the new which have been central to the thought of the
chapter from verse 9 on. The prayer for peace frequently turns up in Paul‘s letters (e.g. Phil
4:7, ―the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will keep your hearts and minds
in Christ Jesus‖; cf. the opening and closing epistolary greetings [see above], and Gal 6:16;
2 Thess 3:16; note also Rom 16:20; 2 Cor 13:11; Phil 4:9; 1 Thess 5:23; and see Wiles,
Prayers). Here peace occurs in an exhortation to the readers (not a prayer as Lohse, 149,
claims) to let Christ‘s peace hold sway in their lives as they relate to one another (note the
context of vv 11, 13 and 14). The distinctive phrase ―the peace of Christ‖ (hJ ei`rene tou`
Cristou`) designates that peace which he both embodies and brings (cf. John 14:27). As the
―Lord of peace‖ (kurio" th`" eijrhJnh"; elsewhere God is called the ―God of peace,‖ Rom
15:33; 16:20; 1 Cor 14:33; 2 Cor 13:11; Phil 4:9; 1 Thess 5:23) he gives peace to believers
(2 Thess 3:16); indeed, he himself is that peace (Eph 2:14).


    brabeuvw which occurs only here in the NT (at Col 2:18 the compound katabrabeuvw,
―condemn,‖ is used) originally referred to the function of the umpire (brabeuthv") who
presided over and presented prizes at the games (evidence for this comes from the time of
Euripides, fifth century B.C.; cf. Stauffer, TDNT 1, 637, 638, BAG, 146, Pfitzner, Paul, 155,
Field, Notes, 196). But there is considerable evidence to show that the verb was normally
used in the more general sense of ―judge,‖ ―decide,‖ ―control,‖ or ―rule‖ (BAG, 146; for
examples see Field, Notes, 196; against Lightfoot, 221, who presses the point about Christ‘s
peace acting as umpire: ―the idea of a decision and an award is prominent in the word‖). ejn
tai`" kardiai" uJmw`n, ―in your hearts,‖ does not point to some private and inward peace of
the soul or some peaceful disposition of spirit. Rather, ―heart‖ is being employed in its
customary OT sense to denote the center of one‘s personality as the source of will, emotion,
thoughts and affections (cf. Behm, TDNT 3, 611–13, see on 2:2). The peace of Christ is to
hold sway over the whole of the readers‘ lives as they relate to one another (cf. D.
Wiederkehr, Die Theologie der Berufung in den Paulusbriefen [Studia Friburgensia, NS 36;
Freiburg, Schweiz: Universitätsverlag, 1963] 196; the phrase ―in your hearts‖ is picked up
in v 16 with the words ―in you,‖ ejn uJmi`n); Christ himself is to be present and ruling in their
midst.
     eij" e{n kai ejklhqhte ejn eJni swmati. ―Into which also you were called in one body.‖
Since the Colossians are said to have been called into the peace of Christ (and that through
the gospel), then the latter expression must designate the realm or sphere in which the new
man now lives. So Foerster (TDNT 2, 414) calls it ―a kingdom in which the believer is
protected‖ (cf. Lohse, 150). As such it is almost equivalent to salvation (see Masson, 146,
and E. Biser, ―Die Idee des Friedens nach den paulinischen Gefangenschaftsbriefen,‖ GuL
27 [1954] 165–70). ejn eJni swmati, ―in one body,‖ indicates not the purpose of the
believers‘ calling but the manner or mode (Masson, 147, Schmauch, 82; cf. Turner, Syntax,
264): it is to the peace of Christ that they were summoned ―as members of a single body‖
(Moule, 124). Because the phrase contains neither definite article (tw`, ―the‖) nor explicit
reference to Christ (Cristou` or aujtou`, ―his‖) it must in the first instance be interpreted to
mean ―inasmuch as you belong to a single organism‖ (Moule, Origin, 76), denoting the
unity of the group, the local congregation at Colossae (Moule, Origin, 76, 77, interprets the
parallel passage of Eph 2:15, 16 along similar lines as denoting one, coherent organism, ―in
a single body‖). Accordingly, those who have been reconciled to God (1:20, 22), who have
peace with him through Christ, should manifest that peace among themselves. But is there
more than a passing reference to the body metaphor, more than an allusion to communal
life? It is possible, as most commentators suppose, that Paul implies Christ‘s body is this
organism and it is depicted as the place of peace (Ernst, 228, claims that the linking of the
motifs of peace and body reminds one of the Colossian hymn, 1:15–20. Christ is the head
of the body and the origin of peace and reconciliation. What is seen there in a world-wide
context, he claims, is here actualized for a special church and its problems). In it men and
women are reconciled to one another and to God: it is the sphere of redemption (Best,
Body, 154; cf. W. Bieder, Die Berufung im Neuen Testament [ATANT 38; Zürich: Zwingli,
1961] 77–79; Schweizer, 156, in the light of the earlier references [1:18, 24; 2:19],
understands the phrase as referring to the body of Christ, although he does concede that it
could refer simply to the unity of the group).
kai eujcaristoi ginesqe. ―And be thankful.‖ Once again in the letter the note of
thanksgiving is struck (cf. 1:3, 12; 2:7; 3:17; 4:2). The Greek refers not simply to a grateful
attitude or a thankful disposition (so the rendering ―be grateful‖ does not quite get the
point), though this is obviously included. Within the Pauline letters the eujcaristew
word-group regularly denotes gratitude that finds outward expression in thanksgiving; there
is an emphasis in Paul on the public aspect of thanksgiving. By mentioning what God has
graciously done in his Son other Christians are encouraged to praise him also; and as
thanksgivings abound so God is glorified (2 Cor 4:15; cf. 1:11; on this theme see P. T.
O‘Brien, ―Thanksgiving within the Structure of Pauline Theology,‖ Pauline Studies in
Honour of Professor F. F. Bruce, ed. D. A. Hagner and M. J. Harris [Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1980] 50–66).From this general exhortation (cf. also v 17; see below for the
view that v 15b is a sort of rubric to the next topic of catechetical instruction) it is clear that
thanksgiving is an integral part of the Christian life (eujcavristo", ―thankful,‖ occurs only
here and at Prov 11:16 in the Greek Bible; the imperative ginesqe, lit. ―become,‖ rather
than ejste, ―be,‖ according to Meyer, 446, draws attention to the ―constant striving after
this exalted aim as something not yet attained‖; cf. Abbott, 290); indeed the regular offering
of thanks to God is almost synonymous with being a Christian (see A. Hamman, La Prière.
I. Le Nouveau Testament [Tournai: Desclée, 1959] 291, 292). By contrast, pagans who
possess the raw materials of the knowledge of God, as his creatures were bound to render
glory and thanksgiving to him as their creator (Rom 1:21), i.e. to recognize his lordship and
live in grateful obedience. But they were destitute of that thanksgiving which the
knowledge they possessed should have drawn forth (cf. the ajcaristoi, ―ungrateful,‖ of 2
Tim 3:2 which describes the character of men in the last days), and the original image of
God was defaced (Merk, Handeln, 213). Here at verse 15 the grounds for thanksgiving are
not spelled out, though previously in the letter the readers were encouraged to praise God
for having delivered them from a tyranny of darkness and transferred them into the
kingdom of his beloved Son (1:12–14). Elsewhere in Paul‘s letters, while the grounds for
the giving of thanks are manifold, the great emphasis falls upon the mighty work of God in
Christ bringing salvation through the gospel. God‘s activity in creation is, on occasion,
mentioned as a basis for the expression of gratitude (cf. Rom 1:21 and the thanksgivings
said over food: Rom 14:6; 1 Cor 10:30; 1 Tim 4:3, 4). But the majority of the Pauline
references are in the context of God‘s grace given in Christ (1 Cor 1:4; cf. 2 Cor 9:15 with
8:9; Rom 1:8; 2 Cor 1:11; Eph 1:16; Phil 1:3, etc). At Colossians 3:15 such thanksgiving,
which is inculcated upon those who are in one body, will be offered as the readers ―sing
psalms, hymns and spiritual songs‖ (v 16). However, it will not be restricted to these
corporate occasions (at v 17 the giving of thanks to God as Father is to be the
accompaniment of everyactivity), as it is to be offered ―under all circumstances‖ (ejn
panti, 1 Thess 5:18), being the appropriate response of those who are filled with
God‘sSpirit (Eph 5:18–20).
    16. As the Colossians were exhorted to let the peace of Christ rule their lives (v 15), so
now they are admonished to let the Word of Christ (oï logo" tou` Cristou` is parallel to hJ
eijrhnh tou` Cristou`, ―the peace of Christ‖) dwell richly among them. The expression,
―the Word of Christ‖ (o; logo" tou` Cristou`), is used here instead of ―the Word‖ (oJ
lovgo", 4:3), ―the Word of God‖ (oJ lovgo" tou` qeou`, 1:25) or ―the Word of the Lord‖
(lovgo" kurivou, 1 Thess 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). The change from ―of God‖ or ―of the Lord‖
may have been due to the Colossian situation; certainly the present expression is in keeping
with the rest of the letter with its emphasis on the person and work of Christ (von Soden,
64, and Abbott, 290). While the genitive ―of Christ‖ (tou` Cristou`) might be subjective
indicating that Christ himself is the speaker when his word is proclaimed (cf. Lightfoot,
222, Meyer, 447, Bruce, 283), it is probably objective referring to the message that centers
on Christ, that Word of truth or gospel (oJ lovgo" th`" ajlhqeiva" tou` eujaggelivou, 1:5; cf.
Gal 1:7; 1 Cor 9:12; 2 Cor 2:12) which came to the Colossians and took up a firm place in
their lives from the time Epaphras first preached it to them. As such it is normative and
ought to control their lives.
That Word is to dwell richly in their midst. ejnoikevw (―live in,‖ ―dwell in,‖ ―indwell‖; so
BAG, 267) appears only in a metaphorical sense in the New Testament (all six occurrences
are in the Pauline corpus). So God himself will dwell among his people (2 Cor 6:16 citing
Lev 26:11, 12), and the Holy Spirit dwells in believers (Rom 8:11 [cf. v 9]; 2 Tim 1:14; cf.
1 Cor 3:16). Not only the Word of Christ but also faith (2 Tim 1:5) may be said to dwell
among God‘s own (contrast Rom 7:17 regarding the indwelling sin). ejn uJmi`n has been
taken to mean ―in your hearts‖ (so Lightfoot, 222, who understands the statement to refer to
―the presence of Christ in the heart as an inward monitor‖), ―among you‖ (Masson, 147; cf.
Schrage, Einzelgebote, 91) or ―in you,‖ that is, ―in your church …, as a whole, being
compared to a house, in which the word has the seat of its abiding operation and rule‖
(Meyer, 448; cf. Abbott, 290). Bruce, 283, claims that Paul would not have wished to be
pinned down too firmly to the alternatives of either ―within you‖ (as individual Christians)
or ―among you‖ (as a Christian community). He does add, however, that ―if one of the two
had to be accepted, the collective sense might be preferred in view of the context.‖
plousivw" (―richly,‖ ―abundantly‖) describes the manner of the Word‘s indwelling.
Elsewhere in the epistles this adverb is found in statements which describe God‘s gracious
and rich bestowal of his gifts: at 1 Timothy 6:17 it is used of ―God who richly (plousivw")
furnishes us with everything to enjoy,‖ in contrast to the ―rich in this world‖; while at Titus
3:6 the Holy Spirit is ―poured out upon us richly (plousivw") through Jesus Christ our
Savior,‖ and in 2 Peter 1:11 an ―entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ will be richly (plousivw") provided.‖ Here in Colossians plousivw" (―richly‖)
appears within an exhortation: the gospel is to have its gracious and glorious way in their
lives. If the double reference of ejn uJmi`n (―within you‖ and ―among you‖) is in view then
this rich indwelling would occur when they came together, listened to the Word of Christ as
it was preached and expounded to them (see Schrage, Einzelgebote, 91, Ernst, 229, and
Schweizer, 157) and bowed to its authority. By this means Christ‘s rule would be exercised
in their lives. As the Spirit of God indwells believers (Rom 8:9, 11; 2 Tim 1:14; cf. 1 Cor
3:16) so the ―Word of Christ‖ should reside among them in rich abundance, producing
great blessing (cf. Ernst, 229, and Lohse, 150).
    ejn pavsh/ sofiva/ didavskonte" kai; nouqetou`nte" eJautouv" ktl. As the word of
Christ richly indwells the Colossians, so by means of its operation they will ―teach and
admonish one another in all wisdom by means of psalms, hymns and spiritual songs‖ (this
lengthy clause gives a modal definition of the preceding, so Meyer, 448). ―Teaching and
admonishing‖ (didavskonre" kai; nouqetou`nte"; some exegetes consider that these
dependent participles occur with an imperatival force, so Lightfoot, 222, Lohse, 150, etc; if
they are taken as true participles then the nominative plurals following the subject oJ lovgo"
tou` Cristou`, ―the word of Christ,‖ are constructed according to sense, so Turner, Syntax,
230, cf. Meyer, 448, and note the similar instance at 2:2—either way the teaching and
admonition in all wisdom arise from the indwelling of the word, cf. Delling, TDNT 8, 498,
Ernst, 229, and Dunn, Jesus, 237) were previously mentioned as activities of Paul and his
co-workers, for it was by such instruction and admonition that the public proclamation of
Christ as Lord was effected (see on 1:28). Here, however, it is the members of the
congregation (so most commentators including Behm, TDNT 4, 1022 [cf. Rom 15:14; 1
Thess 5:14], but contrast Schrage, Einzelgebote, 137) who teach and admonish one another
(eJautouv", ―yourselves,‖ which does not really differ from ajllhvlou", ―one another,‖ being
reflexive in a reciprocal sense [so Robertson, Grammar, 690, BDF, para. 287, Turner,
Syntax, 43], binds the two participles together). The phrase ―in all wisdom‖ (ejn pavsh/
sofiva/) is attached to the following words indicating the manner in which the teaching and
admonition are to occur (although Lightfoot, 221, 222, argued that the phrase, on the basis
of 1:9; Eph 1:8; 5:18, 19, should be taken with the preceding clause [cf. AV, RV], the other
alternative is favored by the sense of 1:28, where teaching and admonition occur in all
wisdom, and it is balanced by ejn cavriti aa[/donte", ―singing with grace or thankfulness,‖
so , RSV, NEB, NIV; cf. Bruce, 283, Lohse, 151, Schweizer, 157), that is, in a thoughtful and
tactful manner (Bruce, 283; see also Bratcher and Nida, 90).
The motif of wisdom (sofiva) turns up on several occasions in Colossians: so Paul prays
that the Colossians might be filled with a knowledge of God‘s will, and the perception of
that will consists in wisdom (ejn pavsh/ sofiva/) and understanding of every sort, on the
spiritual level (1:9). At chapter 1:28 the apostolic ministry of admonition and teaching is
effected ―in all wisdom‖ (ejn pavsh/ sofiva/). In Christ all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge have been stored up (2:3), while by contrast the taboos which the false teachers
propounded were merely human inventions having only the appearance of wisdom (2:23,
lovgon … sofiva"). At chapter 4:5 ―wisdom‖ has to do with practical and realistic behavior
in Christians‘ dealings with those outside the congregation. Here at chapter 3:16 it is
possible that the phrase ―in all wisdom‖ (ejn pavsh/ sofiva/), as at chapter 1:28, stands in
contrast to the heretics‘ claim to wisdom. At the same time this true wisdom, for which
Paul had previously prayed, shows itself in a practical way: the teaching and admonition
are given in a thoughtful and tactful manner.
    yalmoi`", u{mnoi", wj/dai`" pneumatikai`". This mutual instruction and warning are to
take place ―by means of psalms, hymns and spiritual songs.‖ The punctuates the sentence
along these lines (cf. also the AV and RV) although the RSV renders the Greek ―and as you
sing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs with thankfulness in your hearts to God‖ (cf.
NIV) so linking these three nouns with the following participle a[/donte" (―singing‖). It is not
patently clear as to which is the correct interpretation and commentators are as divided on
the point as the versions (so, for example, Delling, TDNT 8, 498, Lohse, 136, 151,
Schweizer, 153, and Barrels, NIDNTT 3, 675, link the noun with the following participles,
while Meyer, 448, Lightfoot, 222, Percy, Probleme, 395, and Bruce, 283, 284, opt for the
other alternative). Our preference for joining ―psalms, hymns and spiritual songs‖ with
―teaching and admonishing one another‖ is for the following reasons: (a) the two participial
clauses ejn pavsh/ sofiva/ didavskonte" … (―in all wisdom teaching …‖) and ejn (th`/)
cavriti a[/donte" … (―with thanksgiving [or grace] singing …‖) are symmetrically
balanced with their prepositional phrases (both commencing with ejn, ―in‖) at the head of
each clause and the participles immediately following (cf. Meyer, 448). By contrast the
other alternative with yalmoi`" ktl. being attached to the following involves an
overweighting of the final participial clause (a criticism noted by Bruce, 284). (b)The RSV
rendering necessitates the insertion of ―and‖ before ―singing‖ (a[/donte", cf. NIV) but this
does not appear in the original (cf. Schweizer, 157, against Delling, TDNT 8, 498). (c) The
parallel passage in Ephesians 5:19 (which interestingly enough the RSV renders as
―addressing [lalou`nte")] one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the Lord with all your heart‖) gives the same general sense as our
interpretation. (d) The objection that mutual teaching and admonition would not take place
in such psalms, hymns and spiritual songs is not valid. If the apostle had in mind antiphonal
praise or solo singing for mutual edification in church meetings (Bruce, 284) then mutual
instruction and exhortation could well have been possible. Further, recent study of NT
hymnody (note the bibliography to 1:15–20 and see also R. P. Martin, ―Approaches to New
Testament Exegesis,‖ New Testament Interpretation. Essays on Principles and Methods, ed.
I. H. Marshall [Exeter: Paternoster, 1977] 235–41 American edition (Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans, 1977) has shown that within early Christian hymns both didactic and hortatory
elements featured.
    It is not possible to distinguish sharply between each of the three terms ―psalms,‖
―hymns‖ and ―songs‖ (so most recent writers, cf. Schlier, TDNT 1, 164, and note Lohse‘s
treatment, 151; against Lightfoot, 222, 223). yalmov" (―song of praise,‖ ―psalm,‖ BAG, 891;
cf. Delling, TDNT 8, 489–503, and Bartels, NIDNTT 3, 668–76) is employed by Luke of the
OT psalms (Luke 20:42; 24:44; Acts 1:20; 13:33) though it came to be used more generally
of a song of praise (1 Cor 14:26; Eph 5:19) of which the OT psalms were probably regarded
as spiritual prototypes (on the basis of the original meaning of yavllw to ―pluck [hair],‖
―twang‖ a bow-string, and then ―pluck‖ a harp or any other stringed instrument, some have
thought that yalmov" inevitably meant a song sung to the accompaniment of a stringed
instrument; but this restriction is unnecessary, cf. Bruce, 284, and Delling, TDNT 8, 499). At
1 Corinthians 14:26 yalmov" may be a newly coined ―song of praise‖ prompted by the
Spirit and sung with thankful rejoicing by a member of the congregation. Bartels (NIDNTT
3, 671, 672) suggests that such songs of praise ―will include free compositions as well as
repeated liturgical fragments …, and also new Christian songs (which may well have been
modelled on the Psalms of the OT and of later Judaism …), such as we know from the
wording of the various songs of Rev.‖ u{mno", a general term in Biblical literature, denotes
any ―festive hymn of praise‖ (LXX Isa 42:10; 1 Macc 13:51; cf. Acts 16:25; Heb 2:12)
though in its two NT occurrences it refers to an expression of praise to God or Christ (here
and Eph 5:19). wj/dhv (―song,‖ BAG, 895) is used in the NT of the song in which God‘s acts are
praised and glorified (cf. Rev 5:9; 14:3; 15:3). Although firm distinctions cannot be drawn
between the terms nor can an exact classification of NT hymns be made on the basis of the
different words (so Delling, TDNT 8, 499, and Worship in the New Testament. Tr P. Scott
[London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1962] 86, 87, and Martin, NCB, 116) taken together
these three words ―psalms,‖ ―hymns‖ and ―songs‖ describe ―the full range of singing which
the Spirit prompts‖ (Lohse, 151; while the adjective pneumatikai`" ―prompted by the
Spirit, consistent with Greek usage, agrees grammatically with the last term wj/dai`",
―songs,‖ it refers to all three nouns). As the word of Christ indwells the members of the
community and controls them so they teach and admonish one another in Spirit-inspired
psalms, hymns and songs (whatever the precise musical form is, see W. S. Smith, Musical
Aspects of the New Testament [Amsterdam: Have, 1962]).
ejn [th`]/ cavriti a[/donte" ejn tai`" kardivai" uJmw`n tw`/ qew`/. These words may specify
another result of the rich indwelling of the word of Christ (Meyer, 450, prefers this
interpretation in which the clause is taken as co-ordinate with the preceding), or they may
denote the attitude or disposition which is to accompany the previously mentioned
instruction and admonition, that is, as the Colossians teach one another in psalms, hymns
and songs inspired by the Spirit, so they are to sing thankfully to God with their whole
being (on this view the participial clause ejn [th`/] cavriti a[/donte", ―singing gratefully,‖ is
subordinate to the preceding; note the discussions of von Soden, 64 and Abbott, 292).
Although it is difficult to be certain, our preference is for the latter since it links the singing
with the teaching through song. If the participial clauses had been co-ordinated one might
have expected a kiav, ―and,‖ to have been inserted. From the context it is clear that both
the instruction and the disposition which should accompany it arise from the rich
indwelling of the Word.The expression ejn th` cavpiti could mean ―gratefully‖ (i.e. with
thanksgiving), ―by the grace (of God)‖ or ―in the (realm of God‘s) grace,‖ (cf. Moule, 125,
126), and the presence or absence of the article Th`/ (―the‖), about which the manuscripts are
divided, does not finally settle the issue (so Moule, 125, 126, and RevExp 70 [1973] 493;
against Lohse, 152, who contends that the definite article specifies cavri" as ―God‘s
bestowal of grace which gives life to the believers. The phrase ejn [cavriti] reminds the
readers of sola gratia (by grace alone) which is the sole basis of existence and creates the
realm in which the Christian life can exist and develop.‖ cf.. Dibelius-Greeven, 45, and
Schmauch, 82). Each of these renderings falls within the range of meanings cavri"
(―grace‖; cf. BAG, 877, 878, and Schweizer, 158) and perhaps one ought not to distinguish
between them too sharply. However, since the note of thanksgiving is an important theme
in the section, appearing at verses 15 and 17, it is just possible that thankfulness, our proper
response to God‘s grace, is in view once again. evn tai`" kardivai" uvmw`n does not specify
an inward disposition as though the apostle is speaking of silent worship in contrast to
―with your voices.‖ As in verse 15 kardiva (―heart‖) is employed to refer to the whole of
one‘s being. ―Man should not only praise God with his lips. The entire man should be filled
with songs of praise‖ (Lohse, 151).
    17 The paragraph with its injunctions is summed up (cf. Bujard, Untersuchungen, 98) in
an exhortation that is universal in scope, covering every aspect of life; it is by no means
―colorless‖ as Lohmeyer, 151, claims. There are few exhortations in the NT which are as
comprehensive as this one (cf. 1 Cor 10:31, ―So whatever you eat or drink or whatever you
do, do it all for the glory of God‖). Every activity is to be done in obedience to the Lord
Jesus and accompanied by the giving of thanks to God through him. If the rich indwelling
of the Word of Christ in the readers‘ lives should be manifest in mutual teaching and
admonition, as the Colossians gratefully sing to God, then it should also (kaiv) show its
dynamic presence in this comprehensive way.
pa`n o{ ti eja;n poih`te ejn lovgw/ h] ejn e[rgw/. This first clause, ―whatever you do, in word or
deed,‖ is an absolute nominative (cf. Meyer, 452, 453, Abbott, 292, and Lohmeyer, 151)
placed at the beginning for rhetorical emphasis and it stands syntactically independent. The
expression ―whatever‖ (pa`n o{ ti ejavn, a Semitic phrase according to K. Beyer, Semitische
Syntax im Neuen Testament [SUNT 1; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1962] 169,
BDF, para. 466[3], and Lohse, 152) introduces this clause and is picked up again with the
word ―everything‖ (pavnta), which begins the main clause. In this way the point is strongly
driven home that the Christian‘s whole life must be lived in obedience to the Lord Jesus.
―In word or deed‖ (ejn lovgw/ h] ejn e[rgw/) explains the first term ―all‖ (pa`n) so making plain
that the injunction ought not to be limited to the context of worship (there is no intention in
this comprehensive injunction to restrict the meaning of ―word‖ and ―deed‖ to the liturgical
practices of ―preaching‖ and the Lord‘s Supper). In all his activities the believer ought to
render ―spiritual worship‖ (Rom 12:1, 2. cf. E. Käsemann, ―Worship in Everyday Life: a
note on Romans 12, ‖ New Testament Questions of Today, 188–95).
    pavnta ejn ojnovmati kurivou ÆIhsou`. ―(Do) everything in the name of the Lord Jesus.‖
The verb in this principal clause has to be supplied, but it is clear from the context that it
should be the imperative poiei`te, ―Do‖ (so most commentators who rightly prefer it to the
participle poiou`nte"; the following participle eujcaristou`nte", ―giving thanks,‖ is then
dependent on the imperative). ―In the name of the Lord Jesus‖ (ejn ojnovmati kurivou
ÆIhsou`) is used elsewhere in the context of baptism (Acts 10:48). The whole content of
salvation revealed in Jesus is comprised in his name (Acts 4:12; 1 Cor 6:11). Belief in the
name of Jesus, i.e. his messianic mission (John 3:18), is God‘s command (1 John 3:23;
5:13), so that anyone who believes in that name receives the forgiveness of sins (Acts
10:43; 1 John 2:12), has eternal life (John 20:21: 1 John 5:13) and escapes the judgment
(John 3:18). The formula ―in the name of Jesus‖ is used with reference to God giving the
Holy Spirit (John 14:26) and the offering of thanks (Eph 5:20). Jesus‘ disciples perform
miracles and acts of compassion in his name (Luke 10:17; Mark 8:38, 39), while Paul was
able to admonish through the name of the Lord Jesus (2 Thess 3:6; 1 Cor 1:10), and give
judgment in that name (1 Cor 5:4) as one commissioned and authorized by him (so
Bietenhard, NIDNTT 2, 654; for further details see his treatment in TDNT 5, 270–81). Here
at Colossians 3:17, ―The whole life of the Christian stands under the name of Jesus,‖ as
Bietenhard has aptly put it (TDNT 5, 274. Lohse, 152, Martin, NCB, 117, and others have
drawn attention to the rabbinic parallel, credited to Rabbi Jose [c.. A.D. 100]: ―Let all thy
deeds be done for the sake of Heaven‖ [lit. ―in the name of heaven‖; Danby‘s translation]).
In becoming a Christian the believer calls upon Jesus as Lord (Rom 10:9, 10) and comes
under the authority of Christ. He belongs wholly to him; thus everything he says or does
ought to be in the light of the fact that Jesus is his Lord. His behavior should be entirely
consistent with Jesus‘ character (Merk, Handeln, 214, following Schrage, Einzelgebote,
240, 241, claims that this singular expression, ―in the name of the Lord Jesus,‖ is a
reference to the historical Jesus), and this will occur as the word of Christ richly indwells
him and other members of the congregation (v 16).
eujcaristou`nte" tw`/ qew`/ patri; diÆ aujtou`. Thanksgiving is to be the accompaniment of
every activity (this clause provides an accompanying definition, ―while you at the same
time give thanks …‖; cf. Meyer, 453), being offered to the Father through Christ. We have
already noted elsewhere in Colossians that thanksgiving is offered to God in his character
as Father (see on 1:3, 12; and note W. Marchel, Abba, Père! La prière du Christ et des
chrétiens. 2nd ed. [AnBib 19A; Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1971] 190–97). Once
again such praise is to ascend to him though here it is specifically mentioned as ―through
the Lord Jesus‖ (dij aujtou`, i.e. the one in whose name all things are to be said and done; cf.
Eph 5:20, ―giving thanks in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father‖). Lohse
(153, following Oepke, TDNT 2, 68, 69) rejects the notion that Jesus Christ is here thought
of as the one who mediates thanks to God (on the ground that the formula ―through Christ‖
is never linked with verbs of asking) and asserts that the phrase ―gives pregnant expression
to the constitutive significance of Christ for the whole of the Christian life‖ (Oepke, TDNT
2, 69, cited by Lohse, 153; he also makes reference to W. Thüsing, Per Christum in Deum.
Studien zum Verhältnis von Christozentrik und Theozentrik in den paulinischen
Hauptbriefen. 2nd ed. [NTAbh, NS 1; Münster: Aschendorff, 1969] 164–237, who treats the
relevant passages from the major Pauline epistles along similar lines). So Lohse asserts:
―Christ is the Lord who provides the basis and sets the goal for the life of believers.‖
    However, without wishing to deny that the ultimate ground for the giving of thanks in
Paul‘s letters is the mighty work of God in Christ bringing salvation through the gospel
(O‘Brien, Studies, 50–66, especially 62), here the basis is not spelled out (H. Greeven,
Gebet und Eschatologie im Neuen Testament [Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1931] 180,
considers Paul‘s short form of exhortation to thanksgiving, in which the grounds are not
expressly stated, is the most profound). If Paul had intended to provide this we would have
expected him to have written dij aujtovn (―because of him,‖ i.e. diav with the accusative
rather than the genitive). Instead, ―through him‖ (dij aujtou`) signifies that Christ is the
mediator of the thanksgiving, a notion that is in view at Romans 1:8, 7:25 (and possibly 1
Cor 15:57; on the use of the diav phrases, such as ―through our Lord Jesus Christ,‖ in
connection with rejoicing in God [Rom 5:11], exhorting the brethren [Rom 15:30], etc, see
W. Kramer, Christ, Lord, Son of God. Tr B. Hardy [SBT 50; London: SCM, 1966] 84–89; cf.
O‘Brien. Introductory Thanksgivings, 204–206). This is not to be understood to mean that
as high priest Christ was presenting or transmitting each prayer to the Father (the view of
O. Cullmann, The Christology of the New Testament. Tr S. C. Guthrie and C. A. M. Hall.
2nd ed. [London: SCM, 1963] 107: 1st American edition [Philadelphia: Westminster, 1959].
Kramer, Christ, 88, rightly notes that exhortation passages such as this prove there is no
idea of any ―high priestly activity‖ on the part of the exalted Lord; cf. Deichgräber‘s
comments, Gotteshymnus, 40), but that thanksgiving could now be addressed to God
through him, the mediator, who had opened the way to the Father‘s presence. This the
readers might do with confidence since Christ‘s death had torn down the separating curtain
which had excluded a direct approach (Harder, Paulus, 163–99, has argued that ―through
Christ‖ is one of the significant distinguishing marks of Christian prayer, especially
thanksgiving).

Explanation
    The Colossian Christians are addressed by means of privileged titles: they are the elect
of God, holy and beloved. That is, they are his chosen people whom he has set apart for
himself and upon whom he has placed his love. These descriptions were employed not only
of Israel in the OT but also of Christ himself in the NT. So the point of the readers‘ similarity
to and identification with him is underscored in a context where they are said already to
have put on the new man (v 10) and consequently must don the graces which are
characteristic of him. In fact, the five so-called virtues listed here (note the two catalogs of
vices in v 5 and 8) are elsewhere predicated of God or Christ: ―heartfelt compassion,
kindness, lowliness, gentleness, longsuffering.‖ Each of these graces with which the readers
are to be clothed shows how they, as God‘s elect, should behave in their dealings with
others, particularly with fellow-believers. As a result of their being clothed with
―longsuffering‖ they are to show continual forbearance toward one another. Further, their
relationships with each other should be characterized by mutual forgiveness. As the Lord
freely forgave them, so when grievances arise they are to forgive each other. Love is the
crowning grace which the new man is to put on as part of his distinctive dress, for love is
the bond which produces perfection.
    Christ‘s peace is to hold sway over every aspect of the readers‘ lives as they relate to
one another; in other words, Christ himself, who is the Lord of peace, is to be present and
ruling in their midst. And since the Colossians are said to have been called into the peace of
Christ (that is, through the gospel), then the latter expression must also designate the realm
or sphere in which the new man now lives. The readers are also admonished to let the word
of Christ—the gospel message which centers on Christ—have its gracious and glorious
way in their midst. If this occurs then the members of the congregation will mutually teach
and admonish one another in a thoughtful and tactful way. Such mutual instruction and
admonition will take place in Spirit-inspired psalms, hymns and songs as the Colossians
sing thankfully to God with their whole being.
The paragraph with its injunctions is summed up in an exhortation that is universal in its
scope, covering every aspect of life. Every activity is to be done in obedience to the Lord
Jesus and accompanied by the giving of thanks to God through him. If the rich indwelling
of the Word of Christ in the readers‘ lives is to be manifested in mutual teaching and
admonition, as the Colossians thankfully sing to God, then it should also show its dynamic
presence in this comprehensive way.




Behavior in                        the         Christian                 Household
(3:18–4:1)
Bibliography
Austgen, R. J. Motivation, 116–20. Crouch, J. E. The Origin and Intention of the Colossian
Haustafel. FRLANT 109. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1972. Goppelt, L. ―Jesus und die
‗Haustafel‘-Tradition.‖ Orienterung an Jesus. Zur Theologie der Synoptiker. Für Josef Schmid, ed.
P. Hoffmann, with N. Brox and W. Pesch. Freiburg: Herder, 1973, 93–106. Hinson, E. G. ―The
Christian Household in Colossians 3:18–4:1.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 495–506. Kamlah, E. ―
‗Upotavssesqai in den neutestamentlichen Haustafeln.‖ Verborum Veritas. Festschrift für Gustav
Stählin zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. O. Bocher and K. Haacker. Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1970, 237–43.
Lillie, W. ―The Pauline House-tables.‖ ExpTim 86 (1974–75) 179–83. Martin, R. P. ―Virtue.‖
NIDNTT 3, 928–32. Merk, O. Handeln, 214–23. Rengstorf, K. H. ―Die neutestamentliche
Mahnungen an die Frau, sich dem Manne unterzuordnen.‖ Verbum Dei manet in Aeternum.
Festschrift für O. Schmitz, ed. W. Foerster. Witten: Luther, 131–45. Schrage, W. Einzelgebote.
———. ―Zur Ethik der neutestamentlichen Haustafeln.‖ NTS 21 (1974–75) 1–22. Schroeder, D.
―Lists, Ethical.‖ IDBSup,; 546, 547. Schweizer, E. Text, 195–209. ———. ―Die Weltlichkeit des
Neuen Testamentes: die Haustafeln.‖ Beiträge zur alttestamentlichen Theologie, Festschrift für
Walther Zimmerli zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. H. Donner, R. Hanhart and R. Smend. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 1977, 397–413. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene, 68, 69.

Translation
18
   Wives, be subject to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 19Husbands, love your wives
and do not be embittered with them. 20Children, obey your parents in all things for this is
pleasing in the Lord. 21Fathers, do not provoke your children, lest they become
discouraged. 22Slaves, give entire obedience to your earthly masters, not with eye-service in
order to please men, but with sincerity of heart as you reverence the Lord. 23Whatever you
do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord not for men. 24For you know that
you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as a reward. Serve the Lord Christ. 25For
anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism. 4:1Masters,
treat your slaves justly and fairly, since you know that you too have a Master in heaven.

Note: The Rules for the Household

Introduction
   Colossians 3:18–4:1 contains a series of admonitions addressed successively to wives
and husbands, children and fathers, slaves and masters. The paragraph is introduced
without any connecting particle and constitutes an independent, self-contained paraenetic
unit. Luther called this scheme of household duties a Haustafel, which means ―a list of
rules for the household,‖ but it is usually translated into English as ―house-table.‖ The rules
formulated to govern behavior patterns within the Christian household have been aptly
described by Schroeder (IDBSup,; 546, cf. his Haustafeln [Hamburg: unpublished doctoral
dissertation, 1959]) as ―station codes‖ for Christians are addressed according to their station
in life. Each party is named (e.g. ―wives‖), a command is given (in the imperative mood,
e.g. ―Be subject to your husbands‖) and a motivating statement for the behavior is supplied
(e.g. ―as is fitting in the Lord‖). Parallels are found in Ephesians 5:22–6:9; 1 Timothy
2:8–15; 6:1, 2; Titus 2:1–10; 1 Peter 2:18–3:7 and in the writings of the Apostolic Fathers
(Did 4:9–11; Barn 19:5–7; 1 Clem 1:3; 21:6–9; Ignatius, Poly 4:1–6:2; Polycarp, Phil
4:2–6:1). However, in most of the latter passages (except Eph 5:22–6:9) there is an absence
of the reciprocal obligations which are a distinctive mark of the ―house-tables‖ and they do
not spring out of a household situation (Schrage, NTS 21 [1974–75] 2, thus claims that
Haustafel is not wholly adequate to describe the latter lists, while Schroeder, IDBSup, 546,
classifies 1 Tim 2:8–15; 6:1, 2; Titus 2:1–10; 1 Clem 21:6–9 etc as ―church-order
regulations‖). The term ―house-table‖ ought, therefore, to be limited to exhortations given
in the characteristic form of Colossians 3:18–4:1 (cf. the Ephesian parallel) with its pairs
and reciprocal duties (so Lillie, ExpTim 86 [1974–75] 180; for similar reasons Crouch,
Origin, limits his inquiry to that of the Colossian Haustafel).

Backgrounds
New Testament scholars have developed no consensus concerning the possible origin and
background to the house-tables. Diverse and competing theories have not been able to
explain the formal and material similarities with earlier ethical teaching elsewhere on the
one hand, as well as the undoubted differences with Colossians 3:18–4:1, the oldest extant
house-table, on the other. So at the end of his historical survey Crouch concluded:
―Historical study of the Christian Haustafeln is at an impasse‖ (Origin, 32). The following
are some of the more significant alternatives:

I. A HELLENISTIC CODE
M. DIBELIUS (DIBELIUS-GREEVEN, 48–50), THE FIRST SCHOLAR TO GIVE
SERIOUS ATTENTION TO THE QUESTION OF BACKGROUND, CLAIMED THAT
THE ORIGIN OF THE CHRISTIAN HOUSE-TABLES WAS TO BE FOUND IN
HELLENISTIC, AND SPECIFICALLY STOIC, MORAL PHILOSOPHY. KEY
EXPRESSIONS, SUCH AS ―IT IS FITTING‖ (AJNH`KEN, COL 3:18), ―IT IS
PLEASING,‖ I.E. TO GOD (EUJAVRESTON, V 20), WERE APPEALED TO IN
SUPPORT SINCE THEY ARE FREQUENTLY FOUND IN STOIC LITERATURE,
WHILE THE EXPRESSION ―IN THE LORD‖ (EJN KURIVW/, V 20) WAS SAID TO BE
ONLY LOOSELY ATTACHED AS A CHRISTIAN ADDITION.
    K. Weidinger, a pupil of Dibelius, defended and expanded his teacher‘s thesis. He noted
that the Haustafel schema was based on the Stoic concept of duty (kaqh`kon) which in turn
was an adaptation of ―unwritten laws‖ (uovmima a[grafa): fear of the gods, honor toward
parents, proper care of the dead, love of friends and fidelity toward country (cf. his Die
Haustafeln: Ein Stück urchristlicher Paränese [UNT; Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1928] 27–34,
41, 42). There was no essential difference among Stoic, Hellenistic Jewish and Christian
forms of these tables. Several writers mention similar obligations in tabulated form (e.g.
Aristotle, Pol. 1, 2; Seneca, Ep 94; Plutarch, LibEd 10; Epictetus, Dissertationes, 2, 10, 3,
7). A waning interest in an imminent Parousia and a growing recognition by Christians that
they needed to come to terms with the world were the reasons (according to Dibelius) for
the Christian adoption of such a schema. For Weidinger it was the need to regulate the
inner life of the church on a nonenthusiastic, noneschatological basis (Haustafeln, 9; cf.
Martin, NIDNTT 3, 931).
Although this theory has been popular, even axiomatic in some circles, it fails to account
for the considerable differences in content between the Christian and non-Christian
material, the different motivations and the unparallelled setting of the specific rubrics in
Stoic writing. In the latter texts the stations are not addressed directly, nor is the imperative
mood used; the naming of the station was sufficient to indicate the appropriate conduct (cf.
Schroeder, IDBSup, 546).

II. A CHRISTIAN CODE

    AT THE OTHER END OF THE SPECTRUM K. H. RENGSTORF (MANN UND
FRAU IM URCHRISTENTUM) SOUGHT TO EXPLAIN THE CHRISTIAN
HOUSE-TABLES AS BEING UNIQUELY CHRISTIAN. FOR HIM THE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE CHRISTIAN HAUSTAFELN AND THE
HELLENISTIC AND JEWISH PARALLELS PREVENT THE CONCLUSION THAT
THEY ARE SLIGHTLY CHRISTIANIZED VERSIONS OF A NON-CHRISTIAN
PARAENETIC PIECE. BECAUSE ALL THE PERSONS ADDRESSED IN THE
HOUSE-TABLES ARE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD, THE MAJOR IMPULSE
IN THEIR FORMATION IS THE EARLY CHRISTIAN INTEREST IN THE
HOUSE-HOLD (OI\KO"). THE EMPHASIS IS ON THE FATHER AS THE HEAD OF
THE ENTIRE HOUSEHOLD RATHER THAN ON SEXUAL DIFFERENCES OR
DISTINCTIONS IN RANK. ACCORDING TO RENGSTORF THE ESSENTIALLY
CHRISTIAN NATURE OF THE CONCERNS OF THE HOUSE-TABLES MAY BE
COMPARED WITH THE SIMILAR ELEMENTS IN THE INFANCY NARRATIVES OF
LUKE 1, 2, WHERE THE HOME LIFE OF JOHN THE BAPTIST AND JESUS ARE
DESCRIBED. JOSEPH LIKE ZECHARIAH IS HEAD OF THE FAMILY, AND THE
BOY JESUS IS SUBMISSIVE (UJPOTAVSSOMAI, ―BE SUBORDINATE,‖ IN LUKE
2:51; IT IS A KEY TERM IN THE EPISTLES AND A DESIGNATION OF THE DUTY
OF THE WIFE IS A SPECIFICALLY CHRISTIAN CREATION, SEE BELOW).
    For Schroeder (Haustafeln; IDBSup, 546, 547) the NT station codes reflect the influence
of diverse traditions: formally, with their direct address, imperative mood and motivating
statements, they are indebted to OT apodictic law (cf. Deut 5:16). The content is drawn
basically from the OT and Judaic tradition, though certain Greek (―what is fitting‖) and
Christian (ajgavph, ―love‖) concepts are added. The basic ethical conceptions of the N T
station codes, according to Schroeder take us back to the teaching and example of Jesus
himself. The occasion for the creation of the house-table was the gospel proclamation itself,
and its setting in life was the teaching activity of the apostles. Specifically Paul created it
because of a problem which in turn stemmed from his own declaration of the equality of all
persons in Christ (Gal 3:28).
Both views have been subjected to a detailed critique by Crouch (Origin, 24–31, etc) who
prefers a background in the following:
III. A HELLENISTIC JEWISH CODE

     WITH SOME VARIATIONS SEVERAL RECENT WRITERS HAVE TRACED THE
ORIGIN TO HELLENISTIC JUDAISM, NOT IN THE SENSE THAT ANY EXACT
PARALLEL TO THE COLOSSIAN HOUSE-TABLE IS TO BE FOUND IN THIS
SOURCE BUT THAT THE MATERIAL FROM WHICH THE HAUSTAFEL WAS
FORMED CAME FROM HELLENISTIC JEWISH SOURCES (CROUCH, ORIGIN,
LOHSE, 154–57, SCHWEIZER, FOR REFERENCES SEE BELOW; CF. SCHRAGE, NTS
21 [1974–75] 7). MARTIN (NIDNTT 3, 931) SPEAKS OF A CLUSTER OF VIEWS
THAT BEGIN WITH THE POINT OF OBEDIENCE TO GOD‘S WILL, SEEN FIRST IN
JEWISH INJUNCTIONS (SO LOHMEYER, 152–55) AND EXPANDED TO INCLUDE
MATERIAL USED IN GENTILE MISSIONARY OUTREACH BY HELLENISTIC
JUDAISM (CROUCH, ORIGIN, 84–101). THE MAIN SOURCES ARE PHILO,
HYPOTHETICA 7:1–9 (CF. DECAL 165–67), JOSEPHUS, AP 2, 190–219, AND PS
PHOCYLIDES 175–227, AN ALEXANDRIAN JEW. FOLLOWING CROUCH MARTIN
POINTS OUT THAT THESE WRITERS ―SHOW SOME HINT OF THE SO-CALLED
NOACHIAN LAWS BY WHICH THE CONDUCT OF GENTILES WAS TO BE
GOVERNED IN MATTERS OF ELEMENTARY MORALS (CONCERNING
IMMORALITY, IDOLATRY, DIETARY RULES)‖ (NIDNTT 3, 931). THERE WERE
LINKS BETWEEN THESE NOACHIAN LAWS AND THE ―UNWRITTEN LAWS‖
(NOVMIMA A[GRAFA), THE BASIC MORAL AND FAMILY DUTIES OF THE
GREEKS. HERE WAS A MEETING PLACE BETWEEN JUDAISM AND HELLENISM
WHERE SOCIAL DUTIES WERE COMMON TO BOTH CULTURES.
Lillie (ExpTim 86 [1974–75] 180, 181), while recognizing resemblances between the
house-tables and Greek teachings, claims that the giving of good advice, particularly to
such subordinates as wives, children or slaves, was something that both the Greek and later
Roman Stoics loved to do. Further, Stoic teachings, diluted by popularizers, were part of
the common culture of the later Hellenistic world, a culture in which Paul and other NT
writers shared. Lillie, therefore, claims that the Jewish and OT influences appear far more
important (cf. the quotation of the fifth commandment in the exhortation to children at Eph
6:2, 3 and the example of Sarah‘s attitude to her husband given to wives in 1 Pet 3:6). Lillie
concludes that the first person to use this house-table pattern of teaching needed only to
have known the conventional views of morality prevailing in the Hellenistic world and the
OT and Jewish traditions that any educated Jew would possess.
     Schweizer, who has written extensively on the subject (cf. 159–171 and Festschrift für
Zimmerli, 397–413, Text, 195–209), follows the general line that the Hellenistic patterns
have reached the NT mediated by Hellenistic Judaism. However, he recognized certain
differences between those of Hellenism and Hellenistic Judaism (cf. Text, 201, 202): first,
in the former it is the male, adult and free individual who is instructed how to act over
against his wife, children and slaves. But the Hellenistic Jewish tables, e.g. Philo,
influenced by the OT, side with the weak, the minor and the unfree (so Israel is reminded of
her slavery in Egypt, the married life of the neighbor is protected, and the authority of
parents over children is limited by the first commandment). Second, while the aim of the
Greek ethical rules was the self-perfection of the individual who ought to have a right
attitude to inferiors and their needs (since this was really for his good and harmonized with
the all-embracing divine order of the cosmos), the central interest of the ethical tables
shaped by the OT was the protection of the weak and the helpless. So the partner is always
taken seriously and all human beings, not only men but also wives, children and slaves, are
treated as ethically responsible subjects.
Schweizer (Text, 202–204) in his treatment of Colossians 3:18–4:1, the first Christian
house-table, has summarized some of the significant differences between it and earlier
models. So wives, children and slaves are addressed equally with their husbands, fathers
and masters. Although this is not totally new, there are no extant examples which are as
thoroughgoing as Colossians 3:18–4:1 in this emphasis on reciprocal obligations. Wives,
children and slaves are ethically responsible to do ―what is fitting‖ as well as husbands,
fathers and masters. Further, the readers are admonished ―in the Lord.‖ This is no mere
cipher, nor simply a loosely attached additional phrase (against Dibelius-Greeven, 49, and
Weidinger, Haustafeln; so rightly Moule, 129, and Schweizer, in Text, 203; on the
significance of the phrase see Schrage, NTS 21 [1974–75] 11, 19–22, and the exegesis
below). Rather than living in conformity with the order of nature the reader is to regulate
his life under the lordship of Christ and in conformity with his will. Finally, it is to be noted
that the Colossian house-table follows on from chapter 3:17 and sets forth in concrete
details some of those words and deeds to be done in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God the Father through him. This naturally leads one to ask why Paul found it
necessary to give this instruction here.

Occasion
     The house-table may have been part of a larger complex of doctrinal and ethical
material, that is, an early Christian catechism, which was easily learned by heart and given
to new converts. But we have no direct evidence for this. Further, if the house-table scheme
was integral to the early Christian catechism, why is there no evidence of it in the
Thessalonian and Roman correspondence, or in 1 Corinthians where such a form would
have been extremely appropriate? Why, too, do the Haustafeln not appear in James (the
paraenetic character of which is undisputed), the Synoptic tradition or the Johannine
literature? (For a critique of this view, presented with slight modifications by Seeberg,
Carrington and Selwyn, see Crouch, Origin, 9–18.)
Dibelius considered that the Christian adoption of the house-table was to be found in a
waning of an imminent Parousia while Weidinger understood it in terms of the need to
regulate the inner life of the church on a nonenthusiastic, noneschatological basis (see
above). But apart from the wider question as to whether the so-called delay of the Parousia
played any part at all in the formation of the NT writings, any attempt to characterize the
house-tables as protests against eschatological enthusiasm is unconvincing (cf. Schrage, NTS
21 [1974–75], 9, 10).
     Others (including Crouch, Origin, 120–51, and Martin, NIDNTT 3, 931, 932) have
argued that as Paul at 1 Corinthians 7:17–24 and 14:33–38 sought to correct a gnosticizing
enthusiasm in Corinth based on a misunderstanding of the apostle‘s teaching in Galatians
3:27–29, to the effect that in Christ there was now the promise of social egalitarianism, so
here the house-table of Colossians 3:18–4:1 confirms the restrictions as binding, thus
safeguarding ―the good order of the church against revolutionary attempts to undermine it
by a false claim to unbridled freedom in the name of gnostic enlightenment and licence‖
(Martin, NIDNTT, 3 932). Although an overenthusiastic reception of the Pauline doctrine of
freedom—such as is evident at Corinth—may have been a factor leading to the
house-tables, it cannot be the only one since the emancipation of children was not an issue
there (Schweizer, Text, 202; note also Schrage‘s criticisms, NTS 21 [1974–75] 4–6).
Particularly significant in the Colossians rule for the household are the references to the
―Lord‖ (kuvrio"). The commands are furnished with the motivation ―in the Lord‖ (ejn
kurivw/). So the readers are admonished ―as is proper in the Lord‖ (wJ" ajnh`ken ejn kurivw/, v
18), and ―for this is pleasing in the Lord‖ (tou`to ga;r eujavrestovn ejstin ejn kurivw/ v 20).
Paul reminds them of the fear of the Lord (fobouvmenoi to;n kuvrion, v 22) and their
conduct is regarded as done for the Lord (wJ" tww`/ kurivw/, v 23). Reference is made to the
Lord‘s judgment (vv 24, 25; 4:1), while they are admonished to ―serve the Lord Christ‖ (tw`/
kurivw/ Cristw`/ douleuvete, 3:24). If the phrase ―in the Lord‖ provides the motivation, then
the other references show that the whole life, thought and conduct of believers (cf. v 17) is
submitted to the lordship of Jesus Christ (Lohse, 156, 157; Schrage, NTS 21 [1974–75]
19–22, Schweizer, Text, 203). Yet the household rules indicate how this obedience is
concretely expressed, and it may be because the devotees of the false teaching at Colossae
were indifferent to mundane and domestic affairs. Perhaps with their concern for ascetic
practices, heavenly worship and visions of divine mysteries the false teachers wished to
keep themselves as pure as possible from all contact with the world, and Paul has to remind
the congregation of the pernicious nature of this teaching, recalling them to the simple
duties of family life. This might appear surprising since the apostle has already summoned
his readers to ―set their minds on things that are above,‖ verse 2. Yet his idea of a life ruled
from above where Christ is reigning is precisely that of a life in marriage, parenthood and
everyday work (Schweizer, Text, 204). It is a life expressed in concrete statements, not in
ideals, and as such follows on from and explains the injunction of verse 17, ―and whatever
you do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the
Father through him.‖

Form/Structure/Setting
    Colossians 3:18–4:1 is a self-contained paraenetic unit consisting of three pairs of
reciprocal exhortations. In each case the exhortation deals with the proper kind of attitude
or action which should be shown by one member to the other. The first member is exhorted
to submission (v 18) or obedience (vv 20, 22) to the other. The relationships are set out in
the most natural order, beginning with the closest—that of wife and husband—and
concluding with the relationship between slave and master (cf. Crouch, Origin, 9). Each
segment consists of an address (e.g. ―wives,‖ v 18; cf. vs 19, 20, 21, 22; 4:1), an exhortation
in the imperative (e.g. ―be subordinate to your husbands,‖ v 18; cf. vv 19, 20, 21, 22; 4:1)
and the reason or motivation for the behavior (e.g. ―as is fitting in the Lord,‖ v 18; cf. vv 20,
22; 4:1; no motivating statement accompanies the exhortations to husbands and fathers).
The sentence structure of the house-table is not long and complicated (cf. Percy, Probleme,
36, and Bujard, Untersuchungen, 102, 103) as the opening two chapters of the letter are.
    The exhortation to slaves (vv 22–25) is expanded and breaks the sequence somewhat.
Verse 22 is a longer exhortation than the four previous admonitions and may be structured
as follows:


22a
oiJ dou`loi uJpakouvete kata; pavnta toi`" kata; savrka kurivoi",
b
mh; ejn ojfqalmodouliva/ wJ" ajnqrwpavreskoi,

c
ajll j ejn aJplovthti kardiva" fobouvmenoi to;n kuvrion.

a
―Slaves, give entire obedience to your earthly masters,

b
not with eye-service in order to please men,

c
but with sincerity of heart as you reverence the Lord.‖

The remainder of the admonition to slaves (vv 23–25) contains three dependent clauses (vv
23a, 24a and 25a), each of which is followed by a principal clause (vv 23b, 24b and 25b):
cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeboren

Comment
    In this household table Paul deals with concrete human relations within the ancient
oi\ko" (―house,‖ ―household‖), not with abstract ordinances. The first pair of injunctions
concerns wives and husbands, then children and fathers, finally slaves and masters. In each
case the subordinate member is mentioned first and is exhorted to be subject
(uJpotavssomai) or to obey (uJpakouvw). Wives, children and slaves are addressed equally
with their husbands, fathers and masters. They too are ethically responsible partners who
are expected to do ―what is fitting in the Lord‖ just as the male, the father and the free man.
But the exhortations to subordination do not stand alone; immediately the second member
of each pair is addressed and reminded of his responsibilities. The twin admonitions stand
together and the first ought not to be interpreted apart from the second (so rightly
Rengstorf, Mann, 46, Schroeder, Haustafeln, 123, 199, and Schrage, NTS 21 [1974–75] 12;
against Crouch, Origin, 31). Each member of the family or household stands in his or her
place within the created order (at 1 Cor 11:9 Paul expressly mentions the creation
ordinances) and has certain responsibilities.
18. aiJ gunai`ke" uJpotavssesqe toi`" ajndravsin. Wives are to be subordinate to their
husbands. Here the use of the nominative case with the article (aiJ gunai`ke", ―wives‖) in
address, instead of the vocative case, has been regarded by Schroeder (Haustafeln, 93, 94;
cf. Lohmeyer, 156) as further evidence of the household table‘s indebtedness to the OT,
since in the LXX the determinative Semitic vocative is rendered by the nominative with the
article (cf. Hos 5:1). But nothing can be built on this since the use of the nominative with
the article in address was not unknown in Greek (BDF, ¶ 147[3], Dibelius-Greeven, 45; cf.
Merk, Handeln, 214).
    The precise nature of the injunction has been a matter of some dispute among N T
exegetes. So, for example, Lohse (157, 158) and Merk (Handeln, 215) claim that Christian
wives are commanded to behave in accordance with the prevailing social order. It is argued
that uJpotavssomai (―be subordinate‖) is not to be interpreted as a specifically Christian
word (as Rengstorf, Mann, 23, 24 and 30, claimed), nor are wives called upon to make a
free decision in the matter (against E. Kähler, Die Frau in den paulinischen Briefen
[Zurich/Frankfurt: Gotthelf, 1960] 156, who considered that being subject was a ―free act
of acknowledging the order which is established through the word of God in Jesus Christ,‖
and that there was no trace of compulsion in the term). Instead, it was argued that this
expression signifies no more and no less than that level of obedience which was customary
and proper in such a relationship in the contemporary world (Merk, Handeln, 215,
following Käsemann). And for Crouch (Origin, 109–111) the submission of the wife to her
husband, which was a concern of Jewish propaganda (PhiloHyp 7.3, and Josephus, Ap
2.201), shows that the woman is viewed as inferior.
But this rather popular line of interpretation is open to question at several points and in
evaluating it one needs to examine the precise meaning of the verb. uJpotavssw, which
appeared in Greek literature relatively late, in the active voice meant to ―place under,‖
―subordinate,‖ and in the middle to ―subject oneself‖ out of fear or to ―submit voluntarily.‖
In the LXX the word is not very common, but is employed in the active voice meaning to
―place under,‖ ―subordinate,‖ especially of God who makes creatures subject to man (LXX
Ps 8:7), the people subject to David (143:2), to the nations (17:48), and the nations to the
Israelites (46:4). The middle voice of the verb denotes to ―subject oneself,‖ ―acquiesce in,‖
and to ―acknowledge someone‘s dominion or power,‖ such as Yahweh‘s and his people‘s
(1 Chr 22:18); it comes to be used meaning to ―surrender to God‖ (Ps 36:7; 61:2, 6) and to
―humble oneself before him‖ (2 Macc 9:12; for details see Delling, TDNT 8, 40).
    Although the contrary impression is often given (Lohse, 157) the word ―subordinate‖
was by no means widespread or commonplace in Greek literature dealing with marriage
(Rengstorf, Verbum Dei, 131–45, found only two examples, Plutarch, Conjugalia
praecepta 33, and Ps-Callisthenes 1, 22, 4, which are often cited by other commentators).
The question, then, is what did Paul mean by using the term here? This verb occurs some
twenty-three times in the Pauline corpus (tavgma, ―order,‖ ―division,‖ and diataghv,
―ordinance,‖ ―direction,‖ appear once each, tavxi", ―order,‖ twice and uJpotaghv,
―subjection,‖ ―subordination,‖ four times) and has to do with order. M. Barth (Ephesians.
Translation and Commentary on Chapters 4–6 [AB 34A; Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1974], 4–6, 709–715; cf. Delling, TDNT 8, 41–45) discerns two groups of statements: (a)
when the active uJpotavssw (―subordinate‖) is used (or the so-called divine passive) the
power to subject belongs to God alone (1 Cor 15:24–28; Rom 8:20; Eph 1:21, 22; Phil
3:21; cf. Rom 13:1; Heb 2:8; 1 Pet 3:22; Luke 10:17, 20); (b) the apostle uses middle
indicatives, participles or imperatives of the verb uJpotavssomai (Robertson, Grammar,
807, suggests it may be a direct middle) to describe the subordination of Christ to God,
members of the congregation to one another, believers with prophetic gifts, or wives,
children and slaves (1 Cor 15:28; Eph 5:21; 1 Cor 14:32; Eph 5:22, etc). In the forty or so
NT occurrences the verb carries an overtone of authority and subjection or submission to it.
Here at Colossians 3:18, as Schweizer (164) claims, it denotes the subjection of oneself, as
Christ subjected himself to the Father (1 Cor 15:28). The demand for mutual submission
among Christians (Eph 5:21) shows that uJpotavssomai (―be subordinate‖) bears a close
relation to Christian tapeinofrosuvnh (―humility‖), as Delling (TDNT 8, 45) and Kamlah
(Verborum Veritas, 237–43) have suggested.That the one verb can be used in an injunction
to describe the attitude required of all Christians, whether in a ―dominating‖ or a
―subordinate‖ position, shows that the notion of interior dignity need not be present in the
term (a point confirmed at 1 Cor 15:28 with reference to Christ; cf. E. Kähler, ―Zur
‗Unterordnung‘ der Frau im Neuen Testament,‖ ZEE [1959] 1–13, Frau, 7. Crouch, Origin,
110, in his concern to note the history of religions parallels has not given sufficient
attention to the other Pauline uses of the term). Schrage (NTS 21 [1974–75] 12) and others
claim that the basis, motivation and emphasis on the subordination of wives to husbands in
the NT are different from similar injunctions elsewhere in the ancient world. The
exhortation to be subordinate is balanced with the instruction to husbands to love their
wives: the admonition is an appeal to free and responsible agents that can only be heeded
voluntarily, never by the elimination or breaking of the human will, much lessby means of
a servile submissiveness (Barth, Ephesians 4–6, 609); and finally its motivation is ―in the
Lord‖ (see below).
    wJ" ajnh`ken ejn kurivw/. ―As is fitting in the Lord.‖ Paul is not suggesting here that the
woman is naturally or spiritually inferior to the man, or the wife to the husband. But he
does mention elsewhere that there is a divinely instituted hierarchy in the order of creation,
and in this order the wife follows that of her husband (1 Cor 11:3, 7–9. The hierarchical
argument for the subordination of wives is made more explicit at Eph 5:23, 24, ―For the
husband is head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the
Savior. Now as the church is subject to Christ, so also wives should be subject to their
husbands in everything.‖ cf. Bruce, 289; note especially G. W. Knight III, The New
Testament Teaching on the Role Relationship of Men and Women [Grand Rapids: Baker,
1977]; and J. B. Hurley, Man and Woman in Biblical Perspective. A study in role
relationships and authority [Leicester: Inter-Varsity, 1981]; and for a different approach
see P. K. Jewett, Man as Male and Female: A Study in Sexual Relationships from a
Theological Point of View [Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1975]). The Christian wife should
recognize and accept her subordinate place in this hierarchy, ―as is fitting.‖ This phrase, wJ"
ajnh`ken (to; ajnh`kon indicates what is proper, one‘s duty; cf. BAG, 66, and Schlier, TDNT 1,
360) has a Stoic ring about it and possibly came into Christian exhortation through the
Hellenistic synagogue (note the similar expression to; kaqh`kon, ―the fitting,‖ Schlier, TDNT
3, 437–40; here the imperfect ajnh`ken, ―it is fitting,‖ is used instead of the customary
present tense, cf. BDF, ¶ 358[2], Turner, Syntax, 90). But the motivation is placed on a
different footing from Stoic ideals with the words ―in the Lord‖ (ejn kurivw/ goes with wJ"
ajnh`ken, ―as is fitting,‖ rather than uJpotavssesqe, ―be subordinate,‖ as the parallel in v 20
makes clear: so von Soden, 65, Abbott, 293, and Bruce, 289, 290). This expression may
mean that the Lord Jesus is the criterion of what is fitting (cf. Schweizer, 165), or more
likely it designates the proper attitude and behavior ―within the new fellowship of those
who own Christ as Lord‖ (Bruce, 289; cf. Best, Body, 4, and Moule, 129; on the
significance of kuvrio", ―lord,‖ in this household table, see 219).
    19. The wife‘s subordination to her husband has its counterpart in the husband‘s duty to
love his wife. This is not simply a matter of affectionate feeling (the more characteristic
verb for this was filevw, to ―feel or show affection‖) or sexual attraction (for which one
would have expected ejravw, to ―love with sexual desire‖); rather, it involves his unceasing
care and loving service for her entire well-being. Crouch (Origin, 112; cf. Merk, Handeln,
216), rejecting the view that wherever ajgapavw (to ―love‖) and ajgavph (―love‖) appear
regardless of context they designate Christian love, claims that here in verse 19 ―the
normal, human love of a husband for his wife‖ is in view. There is nothing specifically
Christian about this injunction since the verb ajgapavw (to ―love‖) and its cognate noun
were frequently used in other contexts of the love of a man for a woman (Origin, 111–13).
However, although the terms were employed in a variety of senses in pre-Christian
antiquity (cf. BAG, 4–6, Merk, Handeln, 216) they do not occur in any extrabiblical
Hellenistic rules for the household (H. Greeven, ―Zu den Aussagen des Neuen Testaments
über die Ehe,‖ ZEE 1 [1957] 122, Schrage, NTS 21 [1974–75] 12, 13 and Lohse, 158).
Further, Paul has already made reference to ―love‖ in this letter (2:2; 3:14) and the first
recipients would have heard these household rules read publicly at the conclusion of that
section in which they were exhorted to put on ―love‖ as one of the graces of the new man.
The injunction to husbands to love their wives is to be understood, in part at least, in the
light of that preceding admonition. Finally, although no theological basis is added to the
injunction—to this extent Lohse‘s comment is apt: ―This command needs no justification,
for the command of love is absolutely valid‖ (158)—the detailed presentation in the parallel
passage, Ephesians 5:25–33 where Christ‘s love for the church is seen as the archetype of
the husband‘s love for his wife, indicates what the author meant by ―love.‖ It is a love that
is sacrificial, that disregards itself, which is defined by Christ‘s action (even if it is argued
that the authorship of the two letters is different both spring from the Pauline school and
must be said to reflect the same viewpoint; on the Ephesians passage see J. P. Sampley,
‗And the Two Shall Become One Flesh.‘ A Study of Traditions in Ephesians 5:21–33
[SNTSMS 16; Cambridge: University Press, 1971] and Barth, Ephesians 4–6, 607–753).
If the husband heeds this apostolic injunction, he will not behave in an overbearing manner;
all areas of married life will be characterized by this self-giving love and forgiveness (cf.
3:13). The original order of the Creator, which was troubled by the rule of sin and
self-centeredness and which ended in the tyranny of eros and the slavery of sex (cf. 3:5),
can be lived in love and forgiveness (cf. Schrage, Einzelgebote, 259).
     kaiv mh; pikraivnesqe pro;" aujtav". The positive injunction is now put negatively:
husbands are not to be embittered against their wives, pikraivnw (to ―make bitter,‖
―embitter,‖ BAG, 657, Michaelis, TDNT 6, 122–25), though appearing only here in an ethical
context of the NT (cf. pikriva, ―bitterness,‖ in the short list of vices at Eph 4:31), was
frequently used by classical writers from Plato onward (on the instances of the word-group
in the LXX see Michaelis, TDNT 6, 122, 123). Christian husbands are not to become angry or
incensed against their wives, either in thought or in word and deed. The preposition prov"
(―against‖) is not attested with the verb in the LXX or Philo, arid Michaelis (TDNT 6, 125; cf.
Lohse, 158) has suggested that what may be especially in view is the bitterness vented on
the wife though not caused by her. At all events, avoidance of bitterness is an expression of
obedience to the commandment to love.
20. Next follow the mutual duties of children and parents. First, children are enjoined to
obey their parents in all things, ta; tevkna (―children,‖ note again the nominative case with
the definite article is used for the vocative, see above 23) probably refers to children who
are growing up and are still subject to their parents (cf. Eph 6:4, ―bring them up‖) rather
than those who have already grown up (though evidence for this latter interpretation is not
lacking, note Lohse, 158). They are addressed as responsible persons within the
congregation (Schweizer, 156; cf. Oepke, TDNT 5, 650) and this is noteworthy. The
injunction to children, like that to slaves, is put rather more strongly than the one to wives.
While the latter was expressed in the middle voice (uJpotavssomai, ―be subordinate‖),
suggesting voluntary submission, the admonitions to children and slaves are in the active
imperative denoting absolute obedience (cf. Hinson, RevExp 70 [1973] 499, 500). The
absoluteness of the command is strengthened by the phrase ―in all things‖ (kata; pavnta, cf.
v 22). Also the verb uJpakouvw (to ―obey‖) is employed rather than uJpotavssomai (―be
subordinate‖) which may only sometimes imply obedience. The former term in Paul had
special reference to one‘s submission to Christ, the gospel and the apostolic teaching (Rom
6:17, 10:16; Phil 2:12; 2 Thess 1:8, 3:14; cf. Matt 8:27; Mark 1:27; 4:41; Luke 8:25; Acts
6:7; Heb 5:9; 11:8; cf. uJpakohv, ―obedience,‖ Rom 1:5; 5:19; 6:16; 15:18; 16:19, 26; 2 Cor
10:5, 6). The obedience of Christian children to their parents is all of a piece with their
submission to Christ as the following words make plain. The unequivocal nature of this
admonition to children is reminiscent of the OT. In the Decalog they are commanded to
honor their parents and the promise of long life is attached (Exod 20:12; Deut 5:16; note
how this is taken up at Eph 6:1–3). The expanded code of Exodus (21:15) ordered the death
penalty for any child striking father or mother. In Judaism and in early Christianity the care
of aged parents was regarded as a religious duty (1 Tim 5:4), their neglect, behavior worse
than that of pagans (5:8; cf. Hinson, RevExp 70 [1973] 500). But in antiquity generally the
emphasis on children‘s duties toward their parents was widespread, although in
non-Christian parallels the demand was for honor rather than obedience (cf. Crouch, Origin,
114, for examples).
    tou`to ga;r eujavrestovn ejstin ejn kurivw/. The motivation (gavr, ―for‖) given is that (lit.)
―this is pleasing in the Lord.‖ Although eujavreston (―pleasing,‖ ―acceptable‖) was used
widely outside the Bible (cf. Foerster, TDNT 1, 456, BAG, 318, and Merk, Handeln, 216)
particularly on inscriptions (Priene, 114, 115, and Nisyros) originally to designate that
which people considered proper (Dibelius-Greeven, 46, considered it points ―clearly to an
established social value‖), in the NT it describes almost exclusively that conduct which is
acceptable to God (at Tit 2:9 eujavresto" describes that which is acceptable to men). For
Paul the term can designate the goal and motivation of the Christian‘s whole life (Rom
12:1, 2; 14:18; 2 Cor 5:9; Eph 5:10; Phil 4:18; cf. Col 1:10 where the similar term
ajreskeiva is used of pleasing the Lord in all respects as the apostle‘s goal for the
Colossians). Normally the expression ―acceptable,‖ or ―pleasing‖ would be followed by the
dative case ―to the Lord‖ (tw`/ kurivw/; cf. Turner, Syntax, 263; manuscript 81 al Clement of
Alexandria [cf. Eph 5:10] have this reading; the RSV renders it as ―this pleases the Lord‖)
but here the additional phrase is ―in the Lord‖ (ejn kurivw/). This has been regarded as: (a) an
unnecessary addition; (b) equivalent to a sort of conditional clause (so tentatively Moule,
130, referring to 1 Cor 7:39; Phil 2:19) meaning ―provided that the children‘s obedience is
ejn Kurivw/, on a truly Christian level of motive‖; (c) signifying ―as judged by a Christian
standard‖ (Lightfoot, 225); or, more likely, (d) obedience to parents is fit and proper in that
sphere in which the Christian now lives, that is, in the new fellowship of those who own
Christ as Lord (on this showing the parallel with v 18 is maintained; there may be, as some
commentators suggest, a conscious qualifying of a traditional maxim by this addition: so
Weidinger, Haustafeln, 51, Lohse, 159, Merk, Handeln, 217, and Martin, NCB, 120). Since
Paul has a Christian family in view (ejn kupriw/), he does not envisage the situation where
parental orders might be contrary to the law of Christ. Clearly at that point the law of Christ
must take precedence and children would have to obey God rather than men (cf. Acts 5:29).
    21. oiJ patevre", mh; ejreqivzete ta; tevkna uJmw`n, i{na mh; ajqumw`sin. If children are
exhorted to render obedience to their parents, then the latter, especially fathers, are enjoined
not to irritate or provoke their children lest they lose heart and become timid. (Bengel 2,
470, comments: ―Despondency is the bane of youth.‖) While the children have to obey both
parents (goneu`sin, v 20), fathers have a special responsibility toward them. Even if it is
conceded that oiJ patevre" here denotes ―parents‖ (as in Heb 11:23, where it is stated that
Moses was hidden ―for three months by his parents,‖ uJpo; tw`n patevrwn aujtou`; cf. BAG,
635), certainly it is the fathers who are primarily in view. In contemporary society the
Roman patria potestas, i.e. the authority and power of the head of the house, gave the father
unlimited power over his children and this law exercised a considerable degree of influence
in the Hellenistic culture generally (cf. Schrenk, TDNT 5, 950, 951). In Hellenistic Judaism
severe punishment could be meted out for disobedient children (Philo‘s demand for severity
on the part of parents has been attributed to this influence: PhiloHyp 7.2; Philo, Spec. Leg.
2.232; cf. Josephus, Ap 2.206, 217; Ant 4.264, and note Crouch, Origin, 114–116). This is
not to suggest, however, that the Roman period evidences no examples of tender love in the
home (Moule, 129, claims it ―would be unjust to paganism … to describe it only in lurid
terms of infanticide and broken homes … And Judaism, even more obviously, was able to
show splendid examples of such happiness‖). But for all that the relationship ejn kurivw/ (―in
the Lord‖) was new, and in this household table fathers are told nothing about their power
of disposal over their children; instead their duties are spelled out (cf. Schrage, NTS 21
[1974–75] 15)—they are not to provoke or irritate them. ejreqivzw, used at 2 Corinthians 9:2
in a good sense of an encouraging example (the only other NT instance, see BAG, 308), here
signifies to ―irritate‖ either by nagging at them or by deriding their efforts (Lohse, 159,
Martin, NCB, 120, and BAG, 308, point out that in Epictetus, Enchiridion 20, the expression,
―when someone irritates [ejreqivsh/] you,‖ refers back to ―the man who reviles or strikes [oJ
loidorw`n h] oJ tuvptwn] you‖; in the LXX it occurs at Num 14:8; Deut 21:20; Prov 19:7;
25:23, etc).
    Fathers are to obey the injunction so that their children (is the uJmw`n, ―your‖ inserted to
remind fathers that the children belong to them? cf. von Soden, 65) do not become
discouraged or think that it is useless trying to please them within the common life of the
home (ajqumevw, to ―be discouraged,‖ ―become timid,‖ appears only here in the NT, though it
turns up frequently in the LXX: e.g. Deut 28:65; 1 Kings 1:6, 7, 15:11; 2 Kings 6:8; 1 Chron
13:11, etc; and was used from the fifth century B.C. on, cf. BAG, 21). The corresponding
passage in Ephesians 6:4 sets the positive counterpart when it urges fathers to rear their
children ―in the discipline (paideiva) and instruction (nouqesiva) of the Lord.‖ There should
be firm guidance, not servitude.
    22. Christian slaves are next addressed and the opening exhortation parallels the
injunction to children. In the list of household rules here and in Ephesians (6:5–9) the
admonitions to slaves are more extensive than those to masters, and they have special
encouragements attaching to them. This may, on the one hand, reflect the social structure of
these churches (cf. Bruce, 293; in the household tables of 1 Pet 2:18–3:8 the admonitions to
slaves have no correlative instructions to masters). Many commentators link this extended
exhortation to slaves with the case of Onesimus whose name is mentioned at chapter 4:9.
Certainly the companion letter to Philemon throws light on the mutual duties of slaves and
masters within the Christian fellowship and ―the transforming effect of this fellowship upon
their relationship‖ but there is no basis for considering that Paul had Onesimus specially in
mind in the present passage (Bruce, 293; see also Lohse, 159). Here the apostle is not
making a social comment on a prevailing custom. He is addressing himself to Christian
readers. The issue was not that of the acceptance of an institution sanctioned by law and
part of the fabric of Graeco-Roman civilization; nor was it a question of how to react to a
demand for its abolition (on the possible significance of the Letter to Philemon to these
issues see below). Rather, it concerned the tension between the freedom given in Christ (cf.
3:11) and the ―slavery‖ in which Christian slaves are to continue to serve their earthly
masters (cf. 1 Cor 7:21–24).
Even those commentators who have asserted most forcefully that Paul took over and
Christianized material from Hellenism or Hellenistic Judaism in the household tables
concede that these injunctions have been newly formulated as specifically Christian
instruction. So Dibelius-Greeven, 47, for example, states: ―The whole section—in contrast
to the preceding—has been formed out of original Christian ideas‖ (cf. Crouch, Origin, 116,
117).


     oiJ dou`loi, uJpakouvete kata; pavnta toi`" kata; savrka kurivoi". ―Slaves, give entire
obedience to your earthly masters‖ (NEB). Slaves who have become believers are to accept
their station as slaves and to obey their earthly masters in everything. The expression oiJ
kata; savrka kuvrioi (―your masters according to the flesh‖) is not to be understood
negatively or disparagingly, but rather shows that they are only lords within an earthly
realm, within the sphere of human relations, in contrast to the Lord who is in heaven (cf.
4:1; Bruce, 293, makes the point that the expression kata; savrka, ―according to the flesh,‖
indicates the relationship between masters and slaves has particular reference to this present
temporary world-order).
mh; ejn ojfqalmodouliva/ wJ" ajnqrwpavreskoi ―Not with eye-service as men pleasers.‖ The
obedience which the slaves must render their masters is described first negatively (mh; ejn
… ―not with …‖), then positively (ajll j ejn … ―but with …‖). ojfqalmodouliva
(―eye-service,‖ BAG, 599, Rengstorf, TDNT 2, 280; on the formation of the word see BDF,
para. 115[1] and Moulton-Howard, Grammar 2, 271), a word not found before the Pauline
writings (here and Eph 6:6), may have been coined by the apostle; it signified that service
performed only to attract attention—and therefore superficial—not for its own sake nor to
please God or one‘s own conscience (Moule, 130; note Theodoret‘s comment on Eph 6:6,
7, cited by Lohse, 160: ―He calls eyeservice that type of service which does not issue from
a sincere heart, but is content in mere external appearance‖). Here at Colossians 3:22 if the
plural is the correct reading then it describes those actions which originate in this dishonest
attitude. Such persons are described as ―men-pleasers‖ (aJnqrwpavresko" which is found in
the LXX at Ps 52:6; PsSol 4:7, 8, 19 and in the NT at Eph 6:6; note BAG, 67), i.e. those who
try to please others in a position of superior authority rather than God (cf. Foerster, TDNT 1,
456).
     ajll j ejn aJplovthti kardiva", fobouvmenoi to;n kuvrion. By contrast (ajllav) Christian
slaves are to serve conscientiously, out of pure motives: ―But with sincerity of heart as you
reverence the Lord.‖ ejn aJplovthti kardiva" means ―with singleness of heart‖ (BAG, 85,
86, Bauernfeind, TDNT 1, 386, 387, and Lohse, 160; note the similar references in 1 Chr
29:17; Wisd 1:1; Test Reub 4:1; Test Sim 4:5; Test Levi 13:1) and denotes the innermost
part of man as simple and sincere. As such his actions will not be guided by false, ulterior
motives, but will be done in the fear of the Lord. These latter words ―flaring the Lord‖
(fobouvmenoi to;n kuvrion) do not refer here to God as they do in the OT (and in Rev 15:4)
but to Christ. Within the Old Testament the motives of fear and love stand side by side. The
God who is great, mighty and terrible (Deut 10:17, 18; cf. 1 Chr 16:25) is gracious to man
(Deut 6:5, 13). We can therefore understand the frequent address to men and women, which
continues into the NT: ―Fear not‖ (Gen 15:l; Judg 6:23; Isa 44:2, etc). But God‘s grace and
favor do not remove the note of solemnity in the address, and the motive of fear of God is
significant in the laws of the Pentateuch (Lev 19:14, 32; Deut 13:11; 17:13, etc) as well as
being a decisive factor in OT piety generally (cf. Ps 103:11, 13, 17; Prov 1:7; 23:17, etc).
Within the NT fovbo" and its cognates are used in the sense of fear, awe and reverence
before God or Christ (e.g. Acts 9:31; 2 Cor 7:1; Eph 5:21; at 1 Pet 1:17 a life in fear is
controlled by the seriousness of judgment and redemption from one‘s earlier lift, while 3:6
makes it plain that fear of God rules out all human intimidation). Such reverence provides
both the motive and manner of Christian conduct (Luke 18:2, 4; 1 Pet 2:17; Rev 11:18), not
only in a general or basic sense but also in specific life situations within the structures of
authority. Thus, the motive of fear turns up some seven times in the household tables (Col
3:22; Eph 6:5; 1 Pet 2:17, 18; 3:2, 6; cf. Eph 5:33). Christian slaves are above all else
servants of Christ and they are to work first and foremost so as to please him. Not fear of an
earthly master, but reverence for the Lord Christ should be their primary motive.
     23. The comprehensive admonition of verse 17 (―whatever you do in word or deed do
all in the name of the Lord Jesus‖), addressed to all members of the congregation, is picked
up here (o{ ejavn poih`te, ―whatever you do,‖ is equivalent to kata; pavnta, ―in everything,‖
of v 22; elsewhere in the NT what is commanded or forbidden is put in a pronoun or relative
clause with poievw, ―do‖: 1 Cor 10:31; Phil 2:14; 1 Tim 4:16; 2 Pet 1:10; cf. Mark 7:13;
Luke 3:19; John 4:29, 39; 7:51; Acts 16:18; 21:33; Rom 1:32; 2:3, so Braun, TDNT 6, 479)
and applied more specifically to Christian slaves: whatever is assigned to them they should
do with their whole heart. ejk yuch`", which means literally ―from the soul,‖ here signifies
―with a wholehearted endeavor‖ (the phrase is virtually equivalent to ejk kardiva", ―from
the heart‖: so Mark 12:30, ―You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul‖; cf. LXX Prov 11:17; Ecclus 6:26; 7:29; 14:4; 19:16; 37:12; Test Gad 2:1; etc
Lohmeyer, 158) and clearly the apostle purposes to lift the slave‘s tasks above the level of
compulsive necessity to that of joyful service (cf. Martin, NCB, 122, who rightly adds that
either way the slave had no choice: he must either work or be punished for disobedience or
idleness). It is just possible that ejrgavzesqe (―do the work‖) is an advance upon poih`te
(―do‖), because the things done are e[rga (―works‖; so Abbott, 294. Braun, TDNT 6, 478,
regards the verbs as synonymous, and although ejrgavzomai [―do the work‖] may simply be
a stylistic variant of poievw [―do‖], this reference is different from v 17 where the latter verb
is simply inferred in the principal clause; here a new verb is inserted with possibly a
slightly different significance).
wJ" tw`/ kurivw/ kai; oujk ajnqrwvpoi". ―As [working] for the Lord not for men.‖ Clearly the
faithful service to be performed by these Christian slaves and which the apostle here calls
for, will benefit their masters. But the slaves are reminded of the ultimate reason or
motivation for their conduct (wJ", ―as,‖ often appears with a participle to indicate the reason
or motivation for something happening; but the NT, like classical Greek, in abbreviated
expressions will omit the participle when it is clear from the context as to what is meant:
e.g. 2 Thess 2:2, see Robertson, Grammar, 1140; BDF, para. 425[4]): they are serving the
Lord and not mere men (note the contrast between kuvrio", ―Lord,‖ and a[nqrwpoi, ―men‖).
As they engage in wholehearted work for their masters so in that very action they are
serving their heavenly Lord.
     24. Paul‘s ethical injunctions are next set within the context of future rewards and
punishment (Steinmetz, Heils-Zuversicht, 31, notes that one of the few traces of future
eschatology in the letter is found here) ―Knowing‖ (eijdovte", here and at 4:1) suggests that
the apostle is recalling a pattern of teaching known to Christians: it is from the heavenly
Lord that they will receive the inheritance as their reward. The term for ―reward‖
(ajntapovdosi", BAG, 73, Büchsel, TDNT 2, 169), which is attested from the time of
Thucydides, occurs in the LXX, the papyri and inscriptions, usually in a bad sense denoting
―the full recompense‖ (of divine judgment, e.g. Ps 68:22). Here, however, the only
occurrence in the NT (the related ajntapovdoma, ―repayment,‖ appears at Luke 14:12 and
Rom 11:9), the term is used with a positive connotation, for the following words ―of
inheritance‖ (th`" klhronomiva") specify the content of that reward (most commentators
and grammarians are agreed that the genitive is one of apposition or definition: see, for
example, Robertson, Grammar, 498): it ―consists in the inheritance‖ (cf. LXX Judg 9:16).
Paul has already mentioned that an eternal inheritance has been prepared for the Colossians
in heaven (1:5, 12, 27; 3:1–4; on the theme of inheritance see on 1:12 and the literature
cited). He now asserts to the members of the congregation who were slaves, and under
Roman law could never inherit anything, that their heavenly Lord (ajpo; kurivou, lit. ―from a
Lord,‖ stands first for emphasis; Lightfoot, 226, points out that the absence of the definite
article from the phrase [cf. 4:1] is very remarkable because it has been studiously inserted
elsewhere in the context of vv 22–24; in his paraphrase he thus attempts to catch the
significance of this omission: ―However you may be treated by your earthly masters, you
still have a Master who will recompense you‖) can be trusted to give his reward at the end
of the day. Retribution might be what the slave would normally expect from his earthly
lord. This Lord is different giving as his reward an eternal inheritance of life in the age to
come (see the rabbinic teaching about God‘s fairness in rewarding his faithful ones
[ 2:16, ―Faithful is thy taskmaster who shall pay thee the reward of thy labour. And
know that the recompense of the reward of the righteous is for the time to come‖] and note
Martin‘s treatment, NCB, 123).
     In using apparently mercenary terms such as ―reward‖ and ―punishment‖ the apostle is
speaking of our relationship with God: reward is here described in terms of an inheritance
that relates to life in the presence of God while punishment is deprivation of his fellowship
and exclusion from his presence (Moule, 131).
Since none would wish to forfeit this precious gift through disobedience (Lohse, 161), Paul
enjoins them to ―serve the Lord Christ‖ (tw`/ kurivw/ Cristw`/; in the rather unusual
expression ―the Lord Christ,‖ here and at Rom 16:18, the apostle is contrasting Christ as
Lord with other lords; so Moule, 131). Although this short sentence might be either an
indicative (Lightfoot, 227; cf. RSV, NIV) or an imperative (Moule, 131, Merk, Handeln, 218,
Lohse, 161, Ernst, 237, Martin, NCB, 123; cf. NEB), since the verb douleuvete ―you serve,‖
could be either, we prefer the latter (a. the best texts do not supply a preceding gavr, ―for,‖
as represented in the AV; the indicative would be correct if the ―for‖ were added [cf. the
Byzantine text] and the sentence regarded as the motivation for the preceding; b. this
injunction resumes the imperative ejrgavzesqe, ―do,‖ of v 23; and c. the following
connective particle gavr, ―for,‖ of v 25, then gives the reason for this admonition). So the
forceful injunctions to slaves (vv 22–25) conclude with this comprehensive admonition:
―Serve the Lord Christ.‖
     25. The ground (gavr) for obeying the injunction to serve Christ as the Lord over all is
now spelled out (Baumert, Sterben, 425, rightly observes that verse 25 is not simply a
negative contrast to the previous statement about the reception of an inheritance, for this
would require an adversative ―but,‖ dev or ajllav; instead it is subordinated to the
immediately preceding injunction, v 24b): oJ ga;r ajdikw`n komivsetai o{ hjdivkhsen ktl.
(―for the one who does wrong shall receive again for the wrong that he has done,‖ etc).
However, it is not patently clear to whom the words refer so that both ancient and modern
commentators are divided as to whether it applies to slaves, masters or both. This general
and inviolable principle is the same as the lex talionis, that is the punishment exactly fits
the transgression (note the correspondence between ajdikw`n, ―he who does wrong,‖ and o{
hjdivkhsen, ―the wrong which he has done‖; other examples of these ―sentences of holy
law‖ are 1 Cor 3:17; 14:38; 16:22a; Gal 1:9; cf. Käsemann, in Questions, 66–81, and note
the view of K. Berger, ―Die sogenannten ‗Sätze heiligen Rechts‘ im Neuen Testament. Ihre
Funktion und ihr Sitz im Leben,‖ TZ 28 [1972] 305–330, who considers they are conditional
relative clauses of wisdom origin having nothing to do with legal norms). komivzw, meaning
to ―bring,‖ is found here in the middle voice with the sense of ―get (for oneself),‖ ―receive‖
(BAG, 442, 443). Baumert (Sterben, 410–31) has made an exhaustive examination of the
term and has argued that here the usage reminds one of the LXX background with its
expression of bearing responsibility (Lev 20:17; Ezek 16:52, 54, 58): accordingly the term
means the wrongdoer will have to bear the guilt and shame of his deed and be answerable
before the judgment seat of Christ the Lord (Sterben, 424).
In favor of the view that there is a change of subject from slaves to masters it has been
argued that Paul‘s connecting ―for‖ (gavr) is thus given its due weight, that the verb to ―do
wrong‖ (ajdikevw, denoting any violation of human or divine law, cf. BAG, 17, Schrenk,
TDNT 1, 157–61) is much more suitable to the master than the slave (the question has been
raised as to how a slave with no legal rights could ―act unjustly‖ against his master), and
that the continuation of the apostle‘s instruction at chapter 4:1 for slaveowners to give their
slaves what is just (to; divkaion) and fair, suggests that in verse 25 masters who were
defrauding their slaves are in view. So the words are not only a sober reminder that all
injustice will be accountable at the divine court (Martin, NCB, 124), but also an
encouragement to the slave to regard himself as the servant of Christ and therefore not to be
disheartened by unjust treatment, knowing that before the final tribunal there will be no
respect of persons (Abbott, 295; also Meyer, 459, 460, and Martin, NCB, 123, 124, who has
strongly advocated this). So this interpretation is parallel to Ephesians 6:9 where masters
are admonished to treat their slaves decently ―knowing that he, who is both their Master
and yours is in heaven, and that there is no partiality with him‖ (Conzelmann, 153).
     The second approach, claiming that the masters (kuvrioi) are not addressed until chapter
4:1, considers it is more likely that verse 25 still refers to the slaves. Admittedly on this
view there is some difficulty with the word ajdikevw (―do wrong‖) which some advocates of
the first interpretation claim is much more suitable to the master than the slave and, along
with the term ―favoritism‖ (proswpolhmyiva), presupposes that the person punished is in a
higher position. However, the verb ajdikevw (―do wrong‖) is fairly general, designating any
violation of law or illegal conduct, and it need not be restricted to masters. In fact, the same
term is employed by the apostle in the companion letter to Philemon (v 18) with reference
to Onesimus, Philemon‘s slave (―if he has wronged you‖ [eij dev ti hjdivkhsevn se], does not
necessarily imply that Onesimus in running away had pilfered something from his master;
he had already caused injury to Philemon‘s property simply by escaping, even if he had not
stolen anything, see below). Others have taken the term at Colossians 3:25 as an indirect
warning against rebelliousness (cf. Ernst, 237) or flattery as a cover for one‘s cunning
(Baumert, Sterben, 425). Probably these suggestions are too specific, and the injunction if it
does apply to slaves is a more general warning about all wrongdoing. They must not
suppose that wicked actions have no significance before God because they are slaves or that
indulgence would be granted because of extenuating circumstances (cf. Schlatter cited by
Masson, 150, and Lohse, 161). Righteous behavior is required of slaves and masters alike
(this could explain the word-correspondence of to; divkaion, ―what is just,‖ at 4:1; so while
at Eph 6:9 it is the master who is reminded that God shows no partiality, here it is the slave:
cf. Percy, Probleme, 401, Schrenk, TDNT 1, 160, Bruce, 295, Merk, Handeln, 218, Caird,
209, as well as earlier commentators such as Chrysostom and Bengel). At God‘s judgment
bar there is no ―partiality‖ or ―bias‖ (proswpolhmyiva, while occurring first in the NT [cf.
Rom 2:11; Eph 6:9; James 2:1], may already have been in use in Hellenistic Judaism and
was formed from the Hebraism lambavnw provswpon, to ―raise the face,‖ found frequently
in the OT to denote respect of persons: Lev 19:15; Deut 1:17; 16:19; cf. BAG, 720; Lohse,
TDNT 6, 779, 780); he is neither biased nor does he allow himself to be influenced by
appearances.
    On balance we favor the second line of interpretation, that is, verse 25 is addressed to
slaves. Some, recognizing the difficulty of making a choice between the alternatives,
consider the words are addressed to both slaves and masters. Schweizer (168; cf. Lightfoot,
227) suggests that perhaps the sentence was deliberately left open so as to apply to all,
while Ernst (237), concurring with the view that we have here a sentence of holy law
(originally preached by charismatic prophets), claims that this is a generally valid apodictic
sentence the judicial character of which is underscored by the housetable.
    The ethical injunctions are set within the context of rewards and punishment in verses
24 and 25, and the judgment on disobedience is as sure as the reward for faithfulness.
While the Bible generally, and Paul in particular, make it plain that salvation is according
to grace, judgment is always according to works, good or bad, for believer and unbeliever
alike. So to Christians the apostle writes: ―For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, that each one may receive what is due (i{na komivshtai, the same verb as in Col
3:25) to him for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad‖ (2 Cor 5:10; cf.
Rom 14:10–12; 1 Cor 3:12–15; 4:4, 5). Bruce, 295, comments:
It may seem difficult to understand how one who by grace is blessed with God‘s salvation in Christ
may yet before the divine tribunal ―receive again the wrong that he has done.‖ But it is in
accordance with the teaching of Scripture throughout that judgment should ―begin at the house of
God‖; and even if the tribunal be a domestic one, for members of the family of God, it is none the
less a solemn reality.
    4:1 At the conclusion of the household table the exhortation to slaves is balanced by a
brief message to masters (oiJ kuvrioi). Probably the Colossian congregation had fewer
slaveowners among its converts than slaves. Yet the former had their responsibilities too. If
slaves like Onesimus had their duties, then masters like Philemon had reciprocal
responsibilities: they must treat their slaves justly and fairly (to; divkaion kai; th;n ijsovthta
toi`" douvloi" parevcesqe). This admonition finds parallels in both Hellenistic and Jewish
ethics. On the Greek side these appear as early as Plato (Leges 6.776d–788a) and Aristotle
(Politica 1260b.6), while during the Roman period Seneca was the most ardent advocate of
the humane treatment of slaves (note especially his forty-seventh letter to Lucilius, cf. J. N.
Sevenster, Paul and Seneca [NovTSup 4; Leiden: Brill, 1961] 185–92; Crouch, Origin,
117–19). He does not attack the institution of slavery as such but accepts it as part of the
existing social order. He feels great pity for slaves, expresses keen censure of the way they
are treated and condemns the misuse of slaves for all kinds of contemptible tasks even
though he recognizes some slaves are anything but faultless (cf. Sevenster, Paul, 186).
Seldom do the Stoic codes, however, refer to the relations of masters to slaves. Palestinian
Judaism accepted the institution of slavery, and slaves were viewed as the property of their
masters (Str-B 4, 717). Hellenistic Jewish circles knew and used current Hellenistic appeals
to masters to treat their slaves properly (so Ecclus 4:30, ―Be not like a lion in your home,
and tyrannous and terrible toward your slaves,‖ also 7:20, 21; 33:31; Philo, Spec. Leg.
2:66–68, 89–91; 3:137–43; Ps Phocylides 224; see Crouch, Origin, 118, 119, for further
examples).
The apostle does not command the masters to free their slaves, but he clearly ―points to an
amelioration of the slaves‘ lot‖ (Martin, NCB,; 124): they are to treat them justly and fairly.
―What is just or right‖ (to; divkaion BAG,; 196, comments: ―The neuter denotes that which is
obligatory in view of certain requirements of justice‖; cf. Schrenk, TDNT 2, 187, 188;
Hinson, RevExp 70 [1973] 505, following Hugedé, 197, suggests that it might refer to
salary; the idea of honest remuneration might be implied in the notion of ―fairness‖
especially as parevcomai rendered ―treat‖ means literally to ―grant,‖ see BAG, 626) is
paralleled by ―what is fair‖ (th;n ijsovthta, BAG,; 381, Stählin, TDNT 3, 354, 355). The
relationship between the two was frequently discussed in the moral teaching and instruction
of popular philosophy (the two terms were often treated as synonyms; Philo gives a
detailed exposition of ―fairness,‖ ijsovth", in Rerdivher 141–206, calling it the ―mother of
justice‖ [mhvthr dikaiosuvnh"], Despecleg 4, 231; cf. Stählin, TDNT 3, 354, 355, Lohse,
162). Here the second term reinforces the first denoting ―the spirit of equity as distinct from
the letter of obligation‖ (Radford, 296, cited by Hinson, RevExp 70 [1973] 505; note
Lightfoot, 228, who says, ―the word naturally suggests an even-handed, impartial
treatment,‖ and Abbott, 296, who describes it as ―what cannot be brought under positive
rules, but is in accordance with the judgment of a fair mind,‖ cf. Stählin, TDNT 3, 355;
against Meyer, 461, 462, and others who suppose the meaning to be that slaves are to be
treated as equals—but this is an obscure way of expressing such a thought). So any harsh
measures of repression or victimization of those in a helpless position (Martin, NCB, 124)
are clearly ruled out (cf. Eph 6:9).
     eijdovte" o{ti kai; uJmei`" e[cete kuvrion ejn oujranw`/. ―Because you know that you also
have a Master in heaven‖ (NIV). The motivation for this just and fair treatment is basically
the same as the slave‘s motive for obeying his master (v 24; note the repetition of eijdovte",
―knowing‖). Masters also (kai; uJmei`", ―you too‖), like their slaves, are answerable to a
greater Master in heaven (with the words kuvrio" ejn oujranw`/, ―a Master in heaven,‖ one is
reminded of 3:1–4—Christ is in heaven seated at the Father‘s right hand in the place of
honor). This one Lord and Judge will decide whether these earthly masters have done what
is truly just and fair. His will is the assessment that really counts. The relationship between
masters and slaves has undergone a basic change. Both owe obedience to the one Lord, and
therefore both have the true standard for their conduct toward one another (cf. Sevenster,
Paul, 192; it is at this point of motivation that, for all their apparent similarities, Paul and
Seneca part company).

Explanation
     This paragraph with its injunctions regulating behavior patterns within the Christian
household follows on from and explicates the injunction of verse 17, ―and whatever you do,
in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father
through him.‖ Particularly significant are the many references to ―the Lord‖: several of the
commands are furnished with the motivation ―in the Lord‖ (vv 18, 20), while reference is
made to fearing the Lord (v 22), conduct that is done for the Lord (v 23) and the Lord‘s
rewarding judgment (vv 24, 25; 4:1). The whole of life, both thought and conduct, is to be
submitted to the Lord Jesus Christ. No area of life stands outside his control; so there is no
final distinction between the sacred and the secular. Yet the household rules indicate how
this obedience is concretely expressed. Perhaps the devotees of the false teaching at
Colossae were indifferent to mundane and domestic affairs. If so, then Paul has to indicate
to the congregation that this teaching is pernicious, and that the Colossians are to be
recalled to the simple duties of family life. The apostle has already summoned his readers
to ―set their minds on things that are above‖ (3:2), for a life ruled from above where Christ
is reigning is precisely a life in marriage, parenthood and everyday work. Right behavior in
these areas is the proper outworking of seeking the things above.
In this table or ―station code‖ Paul deals with concrete human relations within the Christian
household, not with abstract ordinances. The series of admonitions are addressed
successively to wives and husbands, children and fathers, slaves and masters—from the
closest relationship to the most distant. In each case the subordinate member is mentioned
first: wives, children and slaves are addressed as ethically responsible partners who are
expected to do ―what is fitting in the Lord,‖ just like husbands, fathers and masters. But the
exhortations to subordination do not stand alone; immediately the second member of each
pair is addressed and reminded of his responsibilities. The twin admonitions stand together
and the first ought not to be interpreted apart from the second.
     The admonition to wives is an appeal to free and responsible agents voluntarily to
subordinate themselves to their husbands since this is entirely proper within the new
fellowship of those who own Christ as Lord. The husband, for his part, is to show
unceasing care and loving service for his wife‘s entire well-being. No theological basis is
added to the injunction since ―the command of love is absolutely valid‖ (Lohse). And the
detailed presentation in the parallel passage (Eph 5:25–33), where Christ‘s love for the
church is seen as the archetype of the husband‘s love for his wife, indicates what the author
meant by ―love.‖
     Christian children are enjoined to obey their parents in all things. Such obedience is all
of a piece with their submission to Christ as the following words show: ―for this is pleasing
in the Lord.‖ At the same time parents, especially fathers, are not to irritate or provoke their
children lest the latter become discouraged or think that it is useless trying to please the
former within the life of the home. There should be firm guidance, not servitude (cf. Eph
6:4).
In the most extensive of the admonitions slaves who have become believers are to accept
their station as slaves and to obey their earthly masters in everything. Their service is not to
be superficial or performed only to attract attention; rather, Christian slaves are to serve
conscientiously, out of pure motives: ―with sincerity of heart as you reverence the Lord‖ (v
22). As they engage in wholehearted work for their masters so in that very action they are
serving their heavenly Lord. They are to keep the transcendent end in view: a slave might
normally expect retribution from an earthly master at the end of the day. This Master is
different for he gives as his gracious reward an eternal inheritance of life in the age to
come. A brief but solemn exhortation is now addressed to masters. They are not
commanded to free their slaves, but to treat them justly and fairly. The motivation for this is
basically the same as the slave‘s motive for obeying his master: both alike have a greater
Master in heaven. Both owe obedience to that heavenly Lord. And thus their own
relationships with each other are to be understood in the light of this.




Final Admonitions: Persistence in Prayer
and Right Behavior toward Outsiders
(4:2–6)
Bibliography
Brown, R. E. Background, 52–56. Lövestam, E. Spiritual Wakefulness in the New Testament. LUÅ
55/3 Lund: Gleerup, 1963, 75–77. Merk, O. Handeln, 224. Pope, R. M. ―Studies in Pauline
Vocabulary. Of Redeeming the Time.‖ ExpTim 22 (1910–11) 552–54. van Unnik, W. C. ―Die
Rücksicht auf die Reaktion der Nicht-Christen als Motiv in der altchristlichen Paränese.‖ Judentum,
Urchristentum, Kirche. Festschrift für Joachim Jeremias, ed. W. Eltester. BZNW 26; Berlin:
Töpelmann, 1964, 221–34. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene, 70, 71, 94–116.

Translation
2
  Persevere in prayer as you watch for the Lord‘s return, and be thankful.3 Intercede for us,
too, that God may open a door for our message, so that we may proclaim the mystery of
Christ, for which I am in chains, 4that I may make it known, as I should. 5Be wise in your
behavior toward outsiders by snapping up every opportunity that comes. 6Your speech
should always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you should
answer everyone.

Form/Structure/Setting
    This short paragraph of concluding exhortations, similar to those of 1 Thessalonians
5:12–22; Galatians 5:25–6:6 and Philippians 4:8, 9, ends the paraenetic section of the letter.
These admonitions to intercession and missionary responsibility, following the household
table with its injunctions to members in their various stations, are addressed to the whole
congregation. In fact, the opening summons to prayer resumes the theme of chapter 3:17
where the Colossians were encouraged to give thanks to God the Father through Christ
(―grace‖ and ―the word‖ are additional links with 3:16, 17).
    The paragraph contains three sentences: verses 2–4, which contain encouragements for
prayer, thanksgiving and intercession, and verses 5 and 6 which give directions as to how
the Colossians are to behave in their relationships with outsiders. Verses 2 and 5 each
contain an introductory imperative (proskarterei`te, ―continue steadfastly,‖ v 2, and
peripatei`te, ―walk,‖ v 5) and a following participle (grhgorou`nte", ―being watchful,‖ v
2, and ejxagorazovmenoi―making the most of,‖ v 5) which provide a framework (Zeilinger,
Der Erstgeborene, 70, regards these verses as an example of chiasmus) for the personal
references to the work and destiny of the apostle in verses 3 and 4 (cf. Schweizer, 171).
Within these latter verses a participial clause is followed by a series of dependent clauses
and may be structured as follows:


3a
(ejn eujcaristiva/) proseucovmenoi a{ma kai; peri; hJmw`n

b
i{na oJ qeo;" ajnoivxh/ hJmi`n quvran tou` lovgou

c
lalh`sai to; musthvrion tou` Cristou`

d
dij o} kai; devdemai

4a
i{na fanerwvsw aujtov

b
wJ" dei` me lalh`sai

3a
―(With thanksgiving). Intercede for us too

b
that God may open a door for our message

c
to proclaim the mystery of Christ

d
for which I am in chains

4a
that I may make it known,

b
as I should.‖

    (cf. Zeilinger, Der Erstgeborene, 70)
The final sentence, verse 6, is not attached grammatically to the preceding. No finite verb
appears so a third person imperative or cohortative must be supplied, e.g. oJ lovgo" uJmw`n
pavntote [e[stw] ejn cavriti (―your speech should always be gracious‖).
The next clause a{lati hjrtumevno" (―seasoned with salt‖) is in apposition with lovgo"
(―speech‖), while the final words, eijdevnai pw`" ktl. (―that you may know how …‖),
indicate the result. The style of this paragraph with its participles (vv 2, 3, 5 and 6),
dependent relative sentence (v 3), i{na clauses (vv 3, 4), infinitives (vv 3, 4, 6) and
circumstantial phrases (vv 2, 5, 6) is typical of the author (cf. Percy, Probleme, 34, and
Bujard, Untersuchunge

Comment
    In a number of his letters the apostle exhorts his readers to pray and intercede regularly.
Although these admonitions were usually short and concise they formed part of his regular
teaching to his churches (Rom 12:12; Eph 6:18; Phil 4:6; Col 4:2; 1 Thess 5:17; 1 Tim 2:1).
In addition he earnestly requests his readers to intercede for him in his costly work of
spreading the gospel (Rom 15:30–32; 2 Cor 1:11; Eph 6:19; Phil 1:19; Col 4:3; 1 Thess
5:25; 2 Thess 3:1, 2; Phlm 22). In both Colossians and Ephesians (6:18–20) the general
exhortation to pray constantly is immediately followed by the request for petition on the
apostle‘s own behalf (cf. 1 Thess 5:17 and 25). Clearly Paul attached great importance to
the mutual intercession of himself and his converts. Not only does he constantly pray for
them all, but also he begs them to assume wider responsibilities in supporting him in
petitionary prayer (cf. Wiles, Prayers, 283). When they interceded for him it was not the
completing of some formality, but an actual cooperating with him, an assisting of him in
prayer (2 Cor 1:11; cf. Phil 1:19). He earnestly desires this prayerful participation in his
struggle for the gospel from churches which he founded, as well as from others in the
gentile mission (Rom 15:30–32 and here at Col 4:3, 4). Such intercession is not confined to
general matters. It names specific needs and concerns which arise from the missionary
work of the moment (Delling, Worship, 127) and includes requests for a ministry that will
be acceptable to the saints in Jerusalem, for deliverance from enemies of the gospel (Rom
15:30–32; 2 Thess 3:2) and for the proclamation with boldness of God‘s mystery, Christ
(Eph 6:19; Col 4:2).
2. th`/ proseuch`/ proskarterei`te. The congregation is exhorted to constant prayer. The
verb proskarterevw, which means to ―adhere to,‖ or ―persist in,‖ came to be used of a boat
that always stands ready for someone (Mark 3:9), or an activity that one was devoted to or
busily engaged in. It was in this latter sense that it came to be employed to denote
continuance in prayer (Acts 1:14; Rom 12:12; Col 4:2; cf. Acts 2:42, 46) and the ministry
of the Word (Acts 6:4; on the term and its cognate proskartevrhsi", ―perseverance,‖
―patience,‖ see BAG, 715, Grundmann, TDNT 3, 618–20, and R. Kerkhoff, Das unablässige
Gebet. Beiträge zur Lehre vom immerwährenden Beten im Neuen Testament [Munich:
Zink, 1954] 39, 40). Here the injunction suggests determination in prayer, with the resolve
not to give up (Luke 11:5–13) or grow weary (Luke 18:1–8). The content of this prayer (th`/
proseuch`/) is not specifically mentioned, so it is sometimes assumed that all types of
prayer are covered by the term. However, although proseuchv is, on occasion, used of
prayer in general, in both Old and New Testaments it regularly signifies petition (1 Sam
7:27; cf. v 29; 2 Kings 19:4; 20:5; Pss 4:1; 6:9, etc; Mark 9:29; Acts 10:31; 12:5; Rom 1:10;
15:30; James 5:17; in many other instances in the Greek Bible where it has been argued that
proseuchv, ―prayer,‖ and its cognate verb proseuvcomai, to ―pray,‖ bear a general sense of
prayer, a case can be made for the rendering ―petition‖). Such a meaning fits the immediate
context well. Since thanksgiving is to be an accompaniment of this prayerful activity then
the thanksgiving itself (ejn eujcaristiva/) is not included in the term proseuchv (―prayer‖;
against Conzelmann, TDNT 9, 414). Also the following participle proseucovmenoi
(―praying,‖ v 3), which spells out the content of Paul‘s prayer request of the Colossians for
himself and other messengers of the gospel, directs our attention to a particular form of
petition, that is, intercession. The Colossian Christians are to persevere in petitionary
prayer.
    Especially significant are the remaining words of verse 2, grhgorou`nte" ejn aujth`/ ejn
eujcaristiva/ (―being watchful in it [i.e. prayer] with thanksgiving‖). The participle
grhgorou`nte" (―be watchful‖) has been regarded as an independent command (Lohmeyer,
161, and Lohse, 164), with prayer as the right way to exercise watchfulness, or, as is more
likely, an accompaniment of persevering prayer (cf. Meyer, 463, Abbott, 296, and Martin,
NCB, 125). Jesus encouraged his disciples both in the Garden of Gethsemane (Mark 14:38)
and in his eschatological admonitions (Luke 21:34–36; Mark 13:32–37) to ―Watch and
pray.‖ Here Paul is not simply describing the believers‘ general stance to the effect that
they should be watchful and pray at all times (Lohse, 165). Nor is he simply speaking of
attention and engagement in prayer as opposed to a humdrum and lethargic praying (as
Abbott, 296, Lightfoot, 229, Williams, 155, and Moule, 132, claim; cf. the NEB ―with mind
awake‖). grhgorevw (―be awake‖), a term that seems to have been used regularly in
catechetical contexts (cf. Selwyn, 1 Peter, 439–66) has been interpreted in a more technical
sense of the children of light being awake and renouncing the sleep of this world of
darkness, with the mind directed toward Christ‘s coming and the consummation of the hope
(Lövestam, Wakefulness, 75–77, following Lohmeyer, 161, and Benoit, 69. cf. also
Greeven, Gebet, 139, 140, and more recently Martin, Lord, 135, 136, who following
Conzelmann, 155, inclines to this view).Certainly grhgorevw with the figurative meaning to
―be vigilant‖ turns up in contexts which refer to the Parousia, that day of the Lord which
will come suddenly and unexpectedly (1 Thess 5:6; cf. Matt 24:42; 25:13; Mark 13:35, 37;
Luke 12:37; Rev 3:3; 16:15; cf. Oepke, TDNT 2, 338). Both Lohse (164, 165) and
Schweizer (172) consider that the vigilance is not motivated here by a reference to the day
of the Lord. However, while the context of the passage does not contain any explicit
eschatological suggestion (though cf. v 5 with its reference to redeeming the time, kairov"),
it seems justifiable to assume that the concept of wakefulness had an eschatological
character (note especially Lövestam‘s treatment, Wakefulness) and that the apostle is here
encouraging his readers to be on the alert in expectation of the Lord‘s coming
(Conzelmann, 155). Accordingly the prayer they are to persist in is for the coming of God‘s
kingdom. The petition Maranatha (―Our Lord, come,‖ 1 Cor 16:22; cf. Rev 22:20) is to be
on their lips and in their hearts as they look forward in anticipation to Christ‘s glorious
manifestation (Col 3:4). At the same time, thanksgiving is to be the accompaniment of this
prayer (ejn aujth`/ ejn eujcaristiva/)—that outward expression of gratitude to God the Father
who has already freed them from a tyranny of darkness, transferred them into a kingdom in
which his Son holds sway and given them a share in theinheritance of the saints in light
(1:12–14).
3. The apostle‘s exhortation to persevering prayer is immediately followed by a request for
the intercession of the Colossians for himself and his coworkers. He offers petition
regularly for them (1:3, 9) and now asks that as they pray for the coming of the kingdom
they will at the same time (a{ma denotes the coincidence of two actions in time, BDF, para.
425[2], BAG, 42) consistently remember him before the throne of grace (proseucovmenoi,
―praying,‖ a present tense, suggests an ongoing intercessory activity). Clearly he attached
great importance to this regular, reciprocal intercession by his converts and other Christians
in the gentile mission since he appeals for this prayerful support elsewhere (Rom 15:30–32;
Eph 6:19; Phil 1:19; 1 Thess 5:25; 2 Thess 3:1, 2, and Phlm 22). He earnestly desired their
understanding and help in his struggle for the gospel and there was no better way to express
this than by intercessory prayer. The request is that they might pray ―for us‖ (peri; hJmw`n,
which corresponds to the peri; uJmw`n proseucovmenoi, ―praying for you,‖ of 1:8; cf. v 9 and
note the similar correspondence at 2 Thess 3:1 and 1:11; see Riesenfeld, TDNT 6, 54, and
Wiles, Prayers, 259–84), a reference that no doubt includes his friends and colleagues
mentioned later in the chapter who were messengers of the gospel (perhaps Timothy, [1:1]
and Epaphras [4:12, 13] are especially in view; so Lightfoot, 229). But it is clear that Paul
is thinking primarily of his own need for he slips into the first person singular later in the
sentence (―for which I am in chains, that I may proclaim it clearly, as I should,‖ vv 3b, 4).
    i{na oJ qeo;" ajnoivxh/ hJmi`n quvran tou` lovgou. The content of the prayer (expressed by
i{na, ―that‖; cf. Rom 15:31; Eph 6:19; 2 Thess 3:1) is not for the personal benefit of Paul
and his companions but for the preaching of the gospel: it is that ―God may open a door for
our message.‖ The image of an open door turns up in Hellenistic thought (Epictetus
employs it in the sense of a person being free to go anywhere; ―opened doors‖ is also a
figure of literary activity, cf. Jeremias, TDNT 3, 174) as well as in later Judaism where man
opens the door to God by repenting, while God opens the door to man by giving him
opportunities for intercession or repentance, or by granting grace (Str-B 1, 458; 2, 728; 3,
484, 485, 631; Jeremias, TDNT 3, 174). Within the New Testament this picture of an open
door, which is used in missionary contexts, denotes the provision of opportunity. God
opens a door for the missionary by giving him a field in which to work (1 Cor 16:9; 2 Cor
2:12) and he opens a door of faith to Gentiles so that they might believe (Acts 14:27;
elsewhere ajnoivgw is used of the opening of the eyes, Luke 24:31; Acts 26:18; of the
understanding, Luke 24:45; of the heart, Acts 16:14; and of Scripture, Luke 24:32; Acts
17:3). In Colossians 4:3 God is to be petitioned to open a door for the gospel message
(several commentators, both ancient and modern, on the basis of Eph 6:19, have taken this
to mean ―the door of our speech,‖ i.e. ―our mouth,‖ cf. Beza, Bengel; note also Lohmeyer,
161, who understands it of access by Paul to the right thing to say. But this interpretation is
less likely)—this of course also means a door for the messenger, but here the emphasis falls
upon the dynamic, almost personal, character of the Word (cf. 2 Thess 3:1, a prayer request,
―Finally, brothers, pray for us that the message of the Lord may run and be honored‖). Paul
is concerned for an opportunity for effective evangelism; and it is just possible that he is
asking them to pray for his release from prison (so many commentators; cf. Phlm 22, and
on Paul‘s imprisonment see xlix–liv). On the other hand, even when he was at liberty such
doors did not open up to him automatically (1 Cor 16:9; 2 Cor 2:12) and the apostle did not
regard imprisonment as a serious interruption of his missionary work (Phil 1:12, 13; so
Caird, 210). At the conclusion of the Book of Acts (28:30, 31) Luke indicates an open door
was set before Paul in Rome. The opportunities were considerable though special wisdom
was called for (cf. Bruce, 298).
The apostle earnestly desires that God would open a door for the word (and requests the
Colossians to pray along these lines) lalh`sai to; musthvrion tou` Cristou` (―so that we
may proclaim the mystery of Christ‖; the infinitive lalh`sai, ―to speak,‖ ―to proclaim,‖
could be either one of result or intended result, which is tantamount to purpose, for the
distinction between the two is a fine one, cf. Robertson, Grammar, 1089, 1090; see also
Lightfoot, 229, Abbott, 297, Meyer, 465, Lohmeyer, 161). Once again in Colossians the
word ―mystery‖ is used to denote God‘s plan of salvation centered in Christ and which has
special reference to Gentiles (cf. 1:26; 2:2 and see on these verses; here as at Rom 16:25
and Col 1:26 ―mystery‖ is closely related to the message or Word of the gospel, for it is in
the effective preaching and teaching of the gospel that the mystery is made known; cf.
Brown, Background, 55; the genitive too tou` Cristou`, ―of Christ,‖ could be either
epexegetic indicating that Christ himself is the mystery [so Feuillet, Christ, 292], or
objective meaning ―the mystery as it is revealed in the Messiah‖: Zeilinger, Der
Erstgeborene, 113, claims both are possible).
     dij o{ kai; devdemai, ―For which I am in chains.‖ It was on account of his apostolic
activity in making known this mystery that Paul was imprisoned (on the use of devw, to
―bind,‖ as signifying imprisonment see Matt 14:3; 27:2; Mark 6:17; Acts 9:2, 14, 21; 12:6,
etc cf. Büchsel, TDNT 2, 60, and BAG, 177, 178). This is the only place in which Paul uses
this verb in a literal sense, though he employs desmoiv of his ―bonds‖ or ―fetters‖ at
Philippians 1:7, 13, 14, 17; Colossians 4:18 and Philemon 10, 13 (cf. 2 Tim 2:9) as well as
devsmio" (―prisoner‖) at Philemon 1, 9 (cf. Eph 3:1; 4:1; 2 Tim 1:8). The transition to the
singular was natural since he moved from what was common to himself and others to what
was peculiar to himself (regarding his imprisonment, see the Introduction).
     4. The verb fanerovw (―reveal,‖ ―make known,‖ ―show,‖ cf. BAG, 852, 853,
Bultmann/Lührmann, TDNT 9, 3–6, and see on 1:26) when used with reference to the
manifestation of the mystery (1:26; Rom 16:26; 1 Tim 3:16) normally describes God‘s
revelation. Here, although God is the person whom the Colossians are to petition to effect
the opening of the door, it is the apostle who is said to reveal the previously hidden divine
purpose (the i[na clause, ―that …,‖ of v 4 is dependent on the preceding i{na oJ qeo;" ajnoivxh/
―that God may open …,‖ of v 3; Lightfoot, 229, and Abbott, 297. Von Soden, 67, makes
the clause dependent on devdemai, ―I am bound,‖ and argues that Paul who was awaiting
trial wished to make it clear to his judges as to what he preaches and why he must preach
it). Further, this same verb ―reveal‖ is not employed elsewhere to designate the apostolic
proclamation (it is usually to ―announce,‖ kataggevllw, 1 Cor 2:1; ―preach,‖
eujaggelivzomai, Eph 3:8; ―speak,‖ lalevw, 1 Cor 2:7; Col 4:3, 4; ―proclaim,‖ khruvssw, 1
Cor 1:23, etc). So when Paul‘s activity is described as making known the mystery its
unique significance of being the proclamation of divine revelation is emphasized (Lohse,
165). What is elsewhere called the work of God is here said to be Paul‘s activity, no doubt
because of his key role in the plan of God that includes Gentiles. His ministry has salvation
historical significance. Yet it is no less the revelation of God for all that, since it is God
who is asked to open a door for the Word, and it is he alone who can enable the apostle to
publish the mystery openly and in a manner that Paul ought to: the final clause wJ" dei` me
lalh`sai could refer to the necessity of the preaching (so keeping strictly to the meaning of
dei`) and be rendered ―since I am bound to speak it‖ (see 1 Cor 9:16; Acts 23:11; note
Meyer, 466), or the manner of the proclamation (the rightness is then viewed with reference
to ―any given circumstances in which the apostle is called upon to speak,‖ Moule, 133, cf.
Dibelius-Greeven, 50, and Schweizer, 172) and so paraphrased as ―in the way in which it is
right that I should speak it.‖ At first sight it might seem that only the first alternative gives
the dei`, ―it is necessary,‖ its due weight. However, ―a thing which is necessary if one is to
do right in certain conditions is virtually what one ought to do‖ (Moule, 133). We therefore
prefer the second alternative.
Accordingly the Colossians are to persevere in prayer with their eyes fixed on the second
coming, at the same time interceding for the apostle whose ministry to Gentiles has a
salvation historical significance in the purposes of God. Through him God reveals his
divine purpose of blessing in Christ for Gentiles.
    5. In the next injunction Paul turns from his personal situation to a general principle of
Christian conduct, exhorting his readers to behave wisely toward non-Christians: ejn sofiva/
peripatei`te pro;" tou;" e[xw (―Be wise in the way you act toward outsiders‖). ―Wisdom‖
(sofiva), as we have noted, turns up in several important contexts of Colossians (1:9, 28;
2:3 and 3:16; see on these verses). The wisdom which the apostle sets forth is
fundamentally different from that propounded by the false teachers. The latter is but an
empty show of wisdom (lovgo" … sofiva", 2:23). Here ―wisdom,‖ which has to do with a
knowledge of God‘s will (1:9) and walking worthily of the Lord (1:10; cf. Wilckens, TDNT
7, 523), is essentially practical and realistic. Like the Philippians (2:15, ―so that you may
become blameless and pure … shining like stars in the universe‖) these readers are to be
godly, giving no occasion for valid criticism (cf. 1 Cor 10:32, ―Give no offence to Jews or
to Greeks or to the church of God‖). They should be tactful on the one hand, yet bold in
their Christian witness to outsiders on the other (several commentators, including von
Soden, 68, Moule, 133, and Ernst, 239, in the light of the immediate context, consider the
apostle has missionary responsibilities in view; Merk, Handeln, 224, following van Unnik,
Judentum, 228, recognizes there is no explicit basis mentioned but thinks the motivation is
drawn from the missionary possibilities in the situation). The expression ―outsiders‖
corresponds to the rabbinic , ―those who are outside,‖ that is, either heretics or
―the people of the land‖; cf. 2 Macc 1:16; Thucyd. 5, 14, 3, and note Str-B 3,362, Behm,
TDNT 2, 575, 576, and BAG, 279) carries a semitechnical meaning and refers to
non-Christians generally, especially pagans (1 Cor 5:12, 31; 1 Thess 4:12; cf. 1 Tim 3:7; 2
Clem 13:1). Elsewhere in the exhortatory material of the NT the reaction of non-Christians to
the behavior of believers plays a significant role: (a) the latter are to live in such a way that
God‘s name is not dishonored, and (b) no occasion of stumbling should be given which
would prevent men and women being saved (see 1 Cor 10:32, 33; Phil 2:14, 15; Col 4:5; 1
Thess 4:11, 12; 1 Tim 3:7; 6:1; Tit 2:8; 1 Pet 2:15; 3:1, 16; cf. van Unnik, Judentum,
221–34).
    to;n kairo;n ejxagorazovmenoi. Once again the participle has been regarded as having
the force of an imperative (= ―make the most of the time,‖ so Lohse, 167, 168, who
considers the command is not directly connected with the previous injunction about
walking; however, Bruce, 299, who understands the words as an exhortation, correctly
notes that they have special application to the readers‘ duties to their unbelieving neighbors
while the parallel passage of Eph 5:15, 16 seems to have a more general reference to the
duty of Christian prudence); on the other hand, it is quite natural to take the participle as
specifying the means by which the command for the readers to conduct themselves wisely
is to be carried out, that is, by ―snapping up every opportunity that comes.‖ The verb
ejxagoravzw (―buy,‖ ―buy up,‖ ―redeem‖) is drawn from the commercial language of the
market place (ajgorav), and its prefix, the preposition ejk, denotes an intensive activity, a
buying which exhausts the possibilities available (so Büchsel, TDNT 1, 128, who is
followed by many commentators; on the middle voice as signifying the personal interest of
the subject see von Soden, 68, and Robertson, Grammar, 810). The word kairov" (―time‖)
here does not indicate a specific point of time (Gal 6:9; 1 Pet 1:5; 5:6), nor a particular
period of time in salvation history, though it may suggest the paucity of time at one‘s
disposal (cf. 1 Cor 7:29, ―the time is short [oJ kairo;" sunestalmevno"],‖ and Gal 6:10, ―as
we have opportunity [kairovn], let us do good‖). BAG, 271, concedes that one possible
meaning of the phrase is ―make the most of the time‖ since it is ―severely limited because
of the proximity of the Parousia as well as for other reasons.‖ Robinson, Ephesians, 202,
understood the same verb at Ephesians 5:16 and here in its more usual NT sense of to
―rescue‖ time from the evil condition into which the present had fallen (the Ephesian
parallel gives the reason: ―because the days are evil‖). But this is highly doubtful (cf.
Moule‘s criticisms, 134). The Colossians context seems to demand a meaning such as ―use
to the full,‖ ―exploit‖ (cf. Martin, NCB, 127, and note Pope, ExpTim 22 [1910–11] 552–54).
6. Finally, the readers are exhorted to let their speech toward outsiders manifest both the
grace and wisdom that Paul desires for his own utterance (Bruce, 299). oJ lovgo" uJmw`n
(―your speech‖) appears to be a deliberate echo of the apostle‘s preaching of the Word
(lovgo") in verse 3 and includes both private conversation and public proclamation. That
speech should always be (pavntote, ―always,‖ indicates a habitual character, while the
imperative e[stw, ―be,‖ is to be supplied, so Meyer, 467, von Soden, 68, Moulton,
Grammar 1, 183, and Robertson, Grammar, 396; cf. Matt 27:19; 2 Cor 8:16) ejn cavriti an
expression that has been taken to mean: (a) ―gracious,‖ ―charming‖ (lit. ―with
graciousness,‖ BAG, 877, and many exegetes including Meyer, 467, Lightfoot, 230, and
Dibelius-Greeven, 51, who claims that the formulation of the sentence must be based upon
an idiomatic expression generally current at the time; note Moule, 135, Bruce, 299, Lohse,
168, Conzelmann, TDNT 9, 397, and Schweizer, 173; cf. ―the gracious words‖ [oiJ lovgoi
th`" cavrito", a genitive of quality] of Luke 4:22; Epict 3, 22, 90), (b) ―with thanksgiving‖
(Ernst, 240, who adds that the speech of the Christian should be filled with thanksgiving
since it should penetrate the whole of one‘s life; the same expression ejn cavriti has been
taken as referring to thanksgiving at 3:16, see 210), and (c) ―with (God‘s) grace,‖ virtually
referring to the gospel (Haupt considers God‘s grace is given directly to the hearers when
Christians speak to outsiders about their faith; although Schweizer, 173, claims that the
omission of the article makes it hard to understand it as God‘s grace, there are occasions in
the Pauline corpus where cavri" without the article refers to God‘s grace, cf. Eph 2:5 with v
8). On contextual grounds our preference is (a) though it must be remembered that ―grace‖
and ―gracious‖ are intimately related and it is difficult to separate them (cf. Martin, NCB,
128). Here Paul is indicating that not only the content but also the manner of speaking are
important when it comes to the influence the believer exerts on outsiders. Similarly at 1
Peter 3:15, 16 Christians are to defend their faith ―with gentleness and respect.‖
    a{lati hjrtumevno". ―Seasoned with salt,‖ which is the literal rendering of the Greek, is
the second characteristic required of the Colossians‘ speech. Their words must not be dull
or insipid but should be interesting and judiciously chosen. Salt was used in seasoning food
and preserving it from corruption. The latter function may explain the parallel exhortation
in Ephesians 4:29, ―Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only
what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those
who listen‖ (NIV). Those who are the salt of the earth (Matt 5:13; Mark 9:49, 50; Luke
14:34) might be expected to have some savor about their language. This could be taken to
mean ―witty‖ since salt had this significance in pagan usage (apparently derived from the
pungent power of salt) or ―winsome,‖ so that the Colossians‘ speaking was to exercise a
wholesome influence in conversation which might otherwise become debased or crude.
However, attention has been drawn to rabbinic parallels for a metaphorical use of salt as
wisdom (cf. W. Nauck, ―Salt as a Metaphor in Instructions for Discipleship,‖ ST 6 [1952]
165–78; several church fathers, including Origen [Hom in Gen 5:12], took salt in this sense
of wisdom; ―the Torah is like salt‖ is a common comparison found among the rabbis, cf.
Str-B 1, 232–36; 2, 21–23; 3, 631), while in Hellenistic contexts as well as rabbinic ones salt
could describe the appropriate word used in speech (Plutarch, De garrulitate 23 [514, 515],
which speaks of seasoning life with words; for further examples see Moule, 135, and
Lohse, 168). Here Paul‘s statement has particular reference to Christians responding with
the right word to those who ask questions of the community (ajpokrivnomai, ―answer,‖ is
not found elsewhere in Paul), perhaps in connection with their beliefs and behavior. So not
only must the addressees‘ conversation be opportune as regards the time; it must also be
appropriate as regards the person (note the expression eJni; eJkavstw/, ―to each one‖ cf.
Caird‘s comment, 210: ―every one is to be treated as an end in himself and not subjected to
a stock harangue,‖ cf. Lightfoot, 231, Abbott, 298, von Soden, 68). They are, in the words
of Peter, ―always [to] be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the
reason for the hope that you have‖ (1 Peter 3:15).

Explanation
This short paragraph with its admonitions that conclude the exhortatory section of the letter
is, unlike the household table with its station codes, addressed to the whole congregation.
The Colossians are to persist in petitionary prayer. Particularly is the cry Maranatha (―Our
Lord, come‖) to be on their lips and in their hearts as they look forward in anticipation to
Christ‘s glorious manifestation (3:4). Thanksgiving, the outward expression of gratitude to
God the Father for having acted so graciously and decisively in his Son on their behalf, is
to accompany this petition. The apostle who regularly remembered the Colossians in his
prayers (1:3, 9–14), requests them to bring him and his coworkers before the throne of
grace, praying that God would open a door for the gospel message, and thus for the
messenger, which might well involve his release from prison. As apostle to the Gentiles,
Paul has the great privilege of making known the previously hidden divine purpose, that
purpose by which Gentiles are incorporated into the Messiah on an equal footing with Jews,
and he now asks that the Colossians might pray to the living God to enable him to set forth
that divine mystery in a plain and clear manner.
    Turning from his personal situation to general principles of Christian conduct, Paul
exhorts his readers to behave wisely toward non-Christians: the Colossians are to be tactful
yet bold in their Christian witness as they make the most of every available opportunity,
recognizing that their time is limited. Finally, as those who are to behave wisely toward
―outsiders‖ they are admonished to let their speech manifest both the graciousness and
wisdom that Paul desires for his own utterance. They are recipients of God‘s grace: let that
grace be evident in the words they speak. Their conversation ought not to be dull or insipid;
instead, they ought to choose the right word as they respond to each non-Christian who
asks them questions about either their beliefs or behavior.
Personal                  Greetings                    and            Instructions
(4:7–18)
Bibliography
Anderson, C. P. ―Who Wrote ‗the Epistle from Laodicea‘?‖ JBL 85 (1966) 436–40. Ellis, E. E.
Prophecy, 3–22. Ladd, G. E. ―Paul‘s Friends in Colossians 4:7–16.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 507–514.
Lähnemann, J. Kolosserbrief 57, 58, 177–81. Lohse, E. Veritas, 189–94. Ollrog, W.-H. Paulus,
238–40. Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene, 71, 72. ———. ―Die Träger der apostolischen Tradition
im Kolosserbrief.‖ Jesus in der Verkündigung der Kirche, ed. A. Fuchs. Freistadt: Plöchl, 1976,
175–90.

Translation
        7
            Tychicus, my beloved brother, faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord, will
      tell you all the news about me. 8I am sending him to you for this purpose that you may
      know how wea are, and that he may strengthen your hearts. 9[He is coming] with
      Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you
      everything that is happening here.
           10
              Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, sends you his greetings, as does Mark, the cousin
      of Barnabas. (You have already received instructions about him; if he comes to you,
      welcome him.) 11Jesus who is called Justus also sends his greetings. These are the only
      Jewish Christians among my fellow-workers for the kingdom of God, and they have
      been a comfort to me. 12Epaphras, who is one of you and a slave of Christ Jesus, sends
      his greetings. He is always striving [for the gospel] in prayer for you, that you may
      stand forth perfect and be filled with everything that is God‘s will. 13For I can vouch for
      him that he works tirelessly for you and those at Laodicea and Hierapolis. 14Our dear
      friend Luke, the doctor, and Demas greet you. 15Give my greetings to the brothers at
      Laodicea as well as to Nymphab and the church in her house. 16After this letter has been
      read among you, see that it is also read in the congregation at Laodicea, and that you
      in turn read the one from Laodicea. 17Tell Archippus: ―See to it that you complete the
      ministry you have received in the Lord.‖
18
   I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand. Remember my bonds. Grace be with you.

Notes
     a. The reading i[na guw`te ta; peri; hJmw`n (―that you may know how we are‖) has strong
manuscript support (e.g. A B D* G P etc, that is, good representatives of the Alexandrian,
Western and Eastern text types) and it best explains the origin of the other readings.
Furthermore, this reading is consistent with the writer‘s declared purpose of Tychicus‘s
visit (vv 7, 9). For further details see Metzger, Textual Commentary, 626.
b. th;n katÆ oikon aujth`" ejkklhsivan. ―Nympha and the church that is in her house.‖ The
uncertainty of the gender of the name Nuvmfa (feminine ―Nympha‖) or Numua`" (masculine
―Nymphas‖) led to variation in the following possessive pronoun between aujth`" (―her‖)
and aujtou` (―his‖). Lightfoot, 241, suggested the original reading was aujtw`n (―their,‖ so a
 A C P
       33 81 Bohairic, Coptic, etc) and that the original text read ―Nymphas and his friends,‖
which later copyists altered, not realizing it was a common classical construction. This,
however, has been rejected by recent commentators (Mussner, ad loc., is an exception,
supposing that the two names represent those of a married couple whose house was a
meeting-place for Christian worship) on the grounds that the manuscript evidence is not
sufficiently cogent (Moule, 28; cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 627: ―The reading with
aujtw`n [‗their‘] arose when copyists included ajdelfouv" [‗brothers‘] in the reference‖).
Several modem translations (RSV, NEB, JB, NIV) prefer the feminine Nympha and render our
expression ―the church in her house‖ (this is the preference of the UBS Greek New
Testament, based chiefly on the weight of B 6 424c 1739 1877 1881 etc, so Metzger, Textual
Commentary, 627). Lightfoot, 241, argued that the feminine is ―in the highest degree
improbable‖ because of its Doric form, but the denial was countered by Moulton (Grammar
1, 48) who saw here an Attic feminine form with a short alpha, and not the Doric form with
a long alpha. It is possible that some scribes, considering the mention of a woman here
rather unusual, altered the ―her‖ to ―his.‖ Although the case for Nymphas as a man‘s name
has been strongly presented by Moule, 28, and Masson, 156, on balance it seems preferable
to understand the proper noun as feminine so that the phrase be rendered: ―Nympha and the
church that is in her house.‖

Form/Structure/Setting
As in his other letters (see 1 Cor 16:19–24; Rom 16:1–23; Philem 23–25; Phil 4:21–23;
Eph 6:21–24) Paul concludes his epistle to the Colossians with personal greetings and
instructions. This concluding paragraph comprises three sections: a reference to the
messengers who will carry his letter to Colossae (vv 7–9), a series of greetings from a
number of his associates who are acquainted with the Colossian church (vv 10–14), and his
own greeting and brief instructions (vv 15–17). The final salutation is written in Paul‘s own
hand and contains a request to remember his bonds as well as a prayer for grace (v 18).

Comment
Having finished dictating the substance of what he wanted to say to the Colossians, Paul
sends messages and greetings to various people associated with the congregation. Tychicus
and Onesimus will convey Paul‘s personal news to the Colossians who would naturally be
keenly interested to learn how the apostle and Epaphras, the founder of the congregation,
were getting on in prison. Much was done in the ancient world by word of mouth so that
although a letter would contain the more urgent and doctrinal matters the ordinary remarks
would be passed on orally.
    7. Tychicus will be Paul‘s messenger to inform (gnwrivzw, ―make known,‖ which is
used of God‘s making known the mystery, see on Col 1:27, is here [vv 7, 9] employed in a
secular sense, cf. 1 Cor 12:3; 15:1, as it is on occasion in the LXX: 1 Kings 1:27; Neh 8:12;
Prov 9:9; see Bultmann, TDNT 1, 718) the congregation about the apostle‘s personal
situation (ta; kat` ejmev was a common expression to describe the situation of a person: e.g.
Herodotus 7, 148; 1 Esd 9:17; Tobit 10:9; 2 Macc 3:40; Acts 24:22; 25:14; note especially
Phil 1:12 and Eph 6:21; cf. Turner, Syntax, 15; the phrase is taken up again, with reference
to Epaphras as well, in the following verses ta; peri; hJmw`n, ―how we are‖ [RSV], v 8, and
ta; wJde, ―the things happening here,‖ v 9). The wording here is almost identical with that of
Ephesians 6:21, 22, and it is possible that Tychicus was the bearer of that letter as well as
the one to Laodicea (see on v 16). He may have been Paul‘s special envoy at this time to
the churches of provincial Asia which had been established during the apostle‘s Ephesian
ministry. In Acts 20:4 Tychicus (whose name is a common one in inscriptions found in
Asia Minor, so BAG, 831), is mentioned as a native of the province of Asia who was with
Paul in Greece and journeyed with him to Troas at the end of the third missionary journey.
He accompanied Paul to Jerusalem when the latter took the collection from the gentile
churches to their needy Jewish brethren in Jerusalem. According to 2 Timothy 4:12 Paul
sent him on some undesignated mission to Ephesus, while later Paul planned to send either
him or Artemas to Crete to take Titus‘ place (Tit 3:12). He along with several others
appears to have been closely associated with Paul during the latter stages of his ministry
(Ladd, RevExp 70 [1973] 507; Ellis, Prophecy, 4, 5, claims that Tychicus, along with eight
other coworkers who continue in close association with the apostle to the end of his life,
stands in an explicit subordination to Paul—as do Erastus, Mark, Timothy and
Titus—serving him or being subject to his instructions).
    He is commended as ―the beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow-servant in
the Lord‖ (oJ ajgaphto;" ajdelfo;" kai; pisto;" diavkono" kai; suvndoulo" ejn kurivw/). As
noted in connection with Timothy at chapter 1:1 ―brother‖ (ajdelfov") may be used to
describe a ―helper‖ or ―co-worker‖ of the apostle. The term ―brethren‖ (ajdelfoiv) was
Paul‘s favorite in referring to members of the communities to whom he was writing and
was expressive of the very real relationships that exist between Christians as members of
God‘s family (note especially 1 Cor 15:58; Rom 15:14; Phil 3:1; 4:1; Eph 6:10; cf. Banks,
Idea, 61–71, for the treatment of Paul‘s family metaphors, and note R. P. Martin. The
Family and the Fellowship. New Testament Images of the Church. Exeter: Paternoster;
Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1979, 123–25). Tychicus was obviously such a ―brother‖
who was specially dear to the apostle. It is also possible that in this expression Paul is
adding the thought that Tychicus was a particularly valued colleague. At any rate the latter
point comes out in the following words ―faithful minister‖ (pisto;" diavkono") which were
previously used of Epaphras (see on 1:7; diavkono", ―servant,‖ from which we get our title
―deacon‖ [although there is nothing in the context to suggest it is employed in this technical
sense, so Moule, 136, cf. Lohse, 171], also describes the ministry of Paul, 1:23, 25).
Tychicus had rendered ―reliable‖ pistov") service either to Paul, the Colossian church or to
Christ. As a ―fellow-servant in the Lord‖ (suvndoulo" ejn kurivw/) it is just possible that
Tychicus was (or at least had been, since he was now being sent as a messenger by Paul) a
prisoner like Aristarchus (v 10) and Epaphras (Phlm 23). However, in the light of the
application of this term suvndoulo" (lit. ―fellow-slave‖) to Epaphras at 1:7 (see 15) this
suggestion is doubtful. The phrase ―in the Lord‖ (ejn kurivw/ is rendered by the TEV as ―in
the Lord‘s work‖ and the whole phrase ―fellow-servant in the Lord‖ is taken to mean the
―one who serves the Lord along with us‖ (so Bratcher and Nida, 103; cf. Bruce‘s rendering,
302, ―[a faithful colleague and] helper in his service for the Lord‖); alternatively it could
mean he performs his task as one ―in the Lord,‖ that is, as a Christian (on the phrase rjn
kurivw/ ―in the Lord,‖ see the comments on the household table, 3:18–4:1; Lohse, 171,
rightly notes that the phrase is to be connected materially with both ajdelfov", ―brother,‖
and diavkono", ―minister‖).


   8. Paul is sending Tychicus with his letter (e[pemya, with most commentators, is to be
understood as an epistolary aorist, that is, it views the action from the standpoint of the
recipients as they read the letter, and so should be translated ―I am sending‖; the RSV
rendering ―I have sent‖ could be interpreted to mean Tychicus had been dispatched before
Paul wrote to the Colossians; the Greek expression is like a covering note to a letter in
which the bearer is mentioned) to the Colossians to give them all his news eij" aujto;
tou`to, ―for the express purpose,‖ is a ―final‖ expression signifying the apostle‘s aim or
intention and refers to ―he [Tychicus] will tell‖ of v 7; Oepke, TDNT 2, 429; cf. John 18:37;
Acts 9:21; 26:16; Rom 9:17; 14:9; 2 Cor 2:9; Eph 6:22; 1 Pet 4:6). The letter itself does not
mention how Paul is getting on personally and the congregation wants to know how things
are with him. But Tychicus will be able to give them all the details (i[na gnw`te tav peri;
hJmw`n see the textual note above 245). At the same time as Paul‘s colleague and co-worker
he will impress the apostle‘s teaching on the congregation and so strengthen their hearts
(see on the same expression at 2:2; it is not simply through the passing on of information
about Paul in prison that will be the instrument of strengthening but also by means of
admonishing the congregation with Paul‘s teaching, cf. Zeilinger, Jesus, 179).
9. Along with Tychicus Paul is sending Onesimus who is called ―the faithful and beloved
brother‖ (oJ pipyo;" kai; ajgaphto;" ajdelfov"). Although some have argued there is no
compelling reason to identify this Onesimus with the person of the same name in Philemon
10, and the name (meaning ―useful‖) certainly was a common one among slaves during the
period (cf. BAG, 570), the usual inference that it designates one and the same person is
reasonable given the close verbal connections and the names common to the two letters (so
Lohse, 171: ―it must be supposed that one and the same Onesimus is meant,‖ cf. Schweizer,
176). The details connected with his flight and how Paul persuaded him to return home are
not mentioned (they would not be relevant in a letter to be read to the congregation). By
describing him as ―the faithful and beloved brother‖ Paul gives him the same predicates as
Tychicus and Epaphras (though he is not called a diavkono", ―minister,‖ or suvndoulo",
―fellow-slave‖) and this suggests that Onesimus the slave is to receive the same warm
greeting from the Colossian church that would be extended to any visiting Christian. As
one who is a native of Colossae (oÒ" ejstin ejx uJmw`n) he comes armed with a letter of
commendation from the apostle to the Gentiles. (Because Philemon had been personally
wronged it was proper that a personal letter should be sent to him, encouraging him to
forgive his former slave, Bruce, 302.) He too along with Tychicus will inform (note the
shift to the plural guwrivsousin ―they will make known‖) Paul‘s friends of ―everything that
has taken place here‖ (pavnta … ta; w|de).


    10. Greetings are now sent to the Colossian congregation by six of Paul‘s companions
who are with him at the time of writing: three are of Jewish birth (Aristarchus, Mark and
Jesus Justus) and three of Gentile birth (Epaphras, Luke and Demas). This list of greetings
is surprisingly long and should be compared with Romans 16, although in the latter passage
the greetings are, in the main, mostly from Paul to various individuals at Rome (on the
question as to whether Rom 16 was an integral part of the epistle sent to Rome see
Kümmel, Introduction, 314–20, and more recently H. Gamble Jr, The Textual History of
the Letter to the Romans [SD 42; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977] both of whom after
careful examination defend the literary unity of the letter) while in the Colossian greetings
these, in verses 10–14, are from Paul‘s friends to the whole congregation (Paul‘s own
greetings occur at vv 15 and 18).
Aristarchus (the name was a common one, see BAG, 106) is the first-mentioned associate
who passes on his greetings to the Colossians (ajspavzomai, ―greet,‖ the basic meaning of
which appears to be to ―embrace,‖ is the normal term used of greeting in the NT; forty-seven
of its sixty occurrences are as an epistolary formula. It turns up in almost all the letters
appearing in two forms: [1] an imperative, in which the writer asks his readers to present
his greetings from a distance, so Col 4:15, ―Give my greetings [ajspavsaqe]. … to Nympha
and the church in her house,‖ and Rom 16:3–16, or sends a greeting to all the members of
the community, e.g. Col 4:15, ―to the brothers at Laodicea,‖ Phil 4:21; Heb 13:24; cf. Rom
16:16; 1 Cor 16:20; 2 Cor 13:12; 1 Thess 5:26; 1 Pet 5:14 where the holy kiss is part of the
greeting. [2] Indicative greetings with ajspavzetai, etc, occur when fellow-Christians are
absent at the time of writing: they are either mentioned by name [Col 4:10, 12, 14; Rom
16:21–23; 1 Cor 16:19; Philem 23, 24; 2 Tim 4:21] or referred to generally [1 Cor 16:20;
Phil 4:21; Tit 3:15]. These greetings help to give the readers a clear picture of the
circumstances in which the letter was written and to include friends and co-workers of the
apostle in the fellowship he enjoys with the readers. Note also Phil 4:22; Heb 13:24; 2 John
13 and 3 John 15, where groups in the congregation send their greetings, presumably
because of some particular relationship. On Paul‘s distinctive greeting see on v 18 Note
Windisch, TDNT 1, 4960–502, Gamble, History, 59, 60, 73–75, and also BAG, 116, 117, for
papyri examples and references to the secondary literature).


    Aristarchus appears in the narrative of Acts as a native of Thessalonica and a traveling
companion of Paul (Acts 19:29; 20:40). His Christian origins may be traced back to Paul‘s
ministry in Thessalonica (Acts 17:1–9). He was with the apostle at Ephesus and exposed to
danger in the riot in the theater (19:29). Later he went to Jerusalem with Paul as one of the
two delegates from the church at Thessalonica (20:4) and accompanied Paul and Luke
when they sailed from Caesarea to Rome (27:2). Although Acts does not state explicitly
that he journeyed with Paul all the way to Rome it is probable that he did (it has been
suggested he went only as far as Myra, where Paul and Luke changed boats [27:5, 6], and
then returned home to Thessalonica). Certainly if Colossians was written from Rome (see
Introduction xlix–liv) then the reference to Aristarchus here could be taken to mean he
remained with Paul on the journey and after reaching Rome. He is described as oJ
sunaicmavlwtov" mou, which means literally ―my fellow-prisoner of war,‖ and perhaps we
are to understand he was actually in prison with Paul (at Phlm 23 Epaphras receives this
designation although Aristarchus is mentioned in the same sentence, while at Rom 16:7
Andronicus and Junia are called ―fellow-prisoners‖ perhaps because of an imprisonment
with Paul during his Ephesian ministry). It has been suggested that Aristarchus may have
shared Paul‘s captivity voluntarily (Ramsay considered he could have passed as his servant,
cf. Bruce, 305; while others conjectured Paul‘s helpers may have shared his imprisonment
in turn, see Abbott, 300). The word could also be used in a figurative sense meaning ―a
prisoner of Christ,‖ that is, one who has been taken captive by Christ to become a Christian
and a fellow-worker of Paul (it has been argued that strictly speaking Paul was not a
―prisoner of war,‖ that in his imprisonment he does not describe himself as an
aijcmavlwto", ―captive,‖ but always as a devsmio", ―prisoner,‖ and that his fondness for
military images generally as well as his use of other terms in this word-group [so Rom
7:23; 2 Cor 10:5; cf. Eph 4:8; 2 Tim 3:6] suggest a metaphorical significance here, so
Kittel, TDNT 1, 196, 197, Moule, 136, 137, and T. da Castel, Sunaicmavlwto": ―Compagno
di Prigionia o Conquistato Assieme?‖ Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus Internationalis
Catholicus. 2 vols. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1963, 2. 417–28; cf.
Dibelius-Greeven, 51, who however considers it to mean either ―a fellow-Christian or
fellow-worker,‖ and Masson, 155). By way of response Lohse, 172, argues that since the
term ―fellow-prisoner‖ turns up without any further qualification (―of Christ‖ or its
equivalent, as in Eph 3:1; 4:1) it is preferable to take the word literally. Further, it was not
unnatural for Paul, who regarded himself as a soldier of Jesus Christ (note his application of
the term ―fellow-soldier,‖ sustratiwvth, to Archippus, Phlm 2, and Epaphroditus, Phil
2:25), to think of himself during his captivity as a prisoner of war (Bruce, 305; cf. also
Ollrog, Paulus, 76).
Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (oJ ajneyiov" means ―cousin,‖ not ―nephew‖ or ―sister‘s son‖
as in KJV; see BAG, 66) joins Aristarchus in sending greetings. The name no doubt refers to
John Mark, who was from Jerusalem (Acts 12:12, 25) and who traveled with Paul and
Barnabus to Cyprus on the first missionary journey. When they arrived in Perga on the
mainland of Asia, Mark defected and returned to Jerusalem (Acts 13:13). Paul, judging this
to be a weakness in Mark, refused to take him along with them again on the next journey.
Barnabas and Paul had a sharp disagreement over the issue which resulted in the former
taking his younger cousin back to Cyprus while Paul set off with Silas (Acts 15:36–41).
Under the careful guidance of Barnabas, Mark redeemed his reputation so that here he and
the apostle to the Gentiles are again on friendly terms, for Mark is with Paul in his
imprisonment. He is mentioned again at Philemon 24 as Paul‘s ―fellow-worker‖
(sunergov") while at 2 Timothy 4:11, in a clear display of reconciliation, he is
unhesitatingly commended as a faithful Christian worker. Elsewhere Mark appears as
Peter‘s companion (1 Pet 5:13; note the tradition that Mark was Peter‘s attendant and the
author of the second Gospel, the substance of which is Peter‘s preaching: Eusebius, H.E. 3.
39).


    Paul refers to Barnabas as though he was well known at Colossae. Perhaps Mark at this
stage was only slowly winning back his reputation in the Pauline churches and needs Paul‘s
special plea (so Martin, NCB, 131). At any rate the community has already received
instructions about him. If he comes they should welcome him (devcomai is the appropriate
word for the hospitable reception of a guest or visitor: Matt 10:14, 40, 41; Mark 6:11; Luke
9:5, 53; 10:8, 10; John 4:45; Heb 11:31). It is not stated who gave these instructions
(ejntolaiv). If they came from Paul himself then the words about the right reception of Mark
probably give us the gist of them. But if, as seems more likely, the Colossians had received
the communication about Mark from someone else (such as Peter or Barnabas) then Paul is
here giving his personal confirmation of the ―commandments.‖ But we cannot be sure; nor
do we know whether Mark made his way to Colossae or not.
11. The third person to send his greetings was Jesus, who is surnamed Justus. He is quite
unknown to us apart from this reference to him as a Jewish Christian who was with Paul (it
has been conjectured that at Phlm 23 the name ―Jesus‖ [‘ÆIhsou`"] should be read instead of
―of Jesus‖ [‘ÆIhsou`]; on this reading there is a greeting to the Jesus Justus mentioned here
in Colossians, see 307). ―Jesus‖ (ÆIhsou`") was his Jewish name (the Greek form of
―Joshua‖ or ―Jeshua‖) and this was common among Jews (Acts 13:6) until the second
century A.D. when it disappeared as a proper name, no doubt because of the conflict
between the synagogue and the Church (Foerster, TDNT 3, 284–93, especially 285, 286; for
detailed references to the widespread use of the name see BAG, 373, 374). Along with many
other Jews who took a Hellenistic Roman name similar to their Hebrew or Aramaic name
(a practice well illustrated in the case of Paul himself, Acts 13:9) this Jesus called himself
―Justus‖ (a name that was commonly borne by Jews and proselytes: Acts 1:23; 18:7; see
Lightfoot, 236; on the double name see BAG, 380, and Deissmann, Bible Studies, 315, 316).


     These three men are said to be the only Jewish Christians who have remained faithful
fellow-workers of Paul for the kingdom of God (the expression oiJ o[nte" ejk peritomh`",
―those of the circumcision,‖ is best connected with what follows, ou|toi movnoi, ―these
alone,‖ so Abbott, 301, and Meyer, 473; note Moule‘s discussion, 137). The expression oiJ
o[nte" ejk peritomh`", ―those of the circumcision,‖ is normally taken to refer to Jewish
Christians generally (so most commentaries and note Meyer, TDNT 6, 81). However, E. E.
Ellis (―The Circumcision Party and the Early Christian Mission,‖ Prophecy, 116–28,
published in an earlier form as ― ‗Those of the Circumcision‘ and the early Christian
Mission,‖ SE 4 [1968] 390–99) has put forward an interesting alternative: he claims that the
generally accepted definition is neither self-evident from the passage nor does it accord
with the meaning of the phrase elsewhere (the expression occurs six times in the NT: Acts
10:45; 11:2; Rom 4:12; Gal 2:12; Titus 1:10, as well as this passage; it does not turn up in
the LXX or the intertestamental literature, while Justin‘s Dialogiue with Trypho 1, 3 is the
earliest parallel in the patristic writings, so Ellis, Prophecy, 116). ―Those of the
circumcision‖ is to be understood within the framework of a twofold diaspora mission
(according to Ellis, Prophecy, 117–19, who follows Cullmann, Schmithals and others, the
expressions ―Hebrews and Hellenists‖ in Acts point primarily to distinctive Jewish attitudes
toward the Jewish cultus and customs: ―Hebrews designated those Jews with a strict,
ritualist, viewpoint; and Hellenists those with a freer attitude toward the Jewish law and
cultus‖ [118, 119]. Both Hebrews and Hellenists were present in pre-Christian Palestinian
Judaism and from the beginning both were represented among the followers of Jesus. Ellis
suggests that these differences in ritual and discipline between the two groups had
important implications for the structure of the early Christian mission, a mission to the
diaspora that had a twofold character). On this hypothesis our text is referring to Jewish
Christian preachers who took a nonproselytizing attitude to the law and worked with Paul
as they evangelized Jews. ―Paul and certain Hebrews were pursuing their distinctive
missions in a co-operative fashion‖ (Ellis, Prophecy, 124, who notes that this ―venture in
ecumenical Christianity‖ probably also occurred at Antioch [Acts 11:20], while Paul‘s
Hebrew opponents of 2 Corinthians were the reverse; that Paul should say at Col 4:11
ou|toi movnoi, ―these alone,‖ suggests that the cooperative effort was failing). Martin, NC B,
143, claims this description of a concordat sounds a little too modern while Ladd, RevExp
70 (1973), 510, considers it is difficult to see any particular Jewish emphasis in the mention
of the kingdom of God.
At any rate the apostle is grateful for their faithful presence: they are ―fellow-workers for
the kingdom of God‖ (sunergoi; eij" th;n basileivan tou` qeou`) who have proved to be a
comfort (parhgoriva) to him. sunergoiv are ―helpers‖ or ―fellow-workers‖ (BAG, 787, 788).
It is not used of believers in general (at 1 Cor 3:9; 2 Cor 1:24 and 8:23 they are implicitly
distinguished from the congregation) but describes those who are co-workers ―with God‖ (1
Cor 3:9; 1 Thess 3:2), ―in Christ‖ (Rom 16:3, 9) of Paul (Rom 16:21; Phil 2:25; Philem 1,
24), and for the Christian community (2 Cor 8:23; cf. 1 Cor 3:9; 2 Cor 1:24), qualifiers
which indicate whose work it is, the sphere and company in which it is effected, and those
who receive its benefits (so Ellis, in Prophecy, 6; cf. Bertram, TDNT 7, 871–76, and see
further on Phlm 1). Instead of stating that these men work with him, the apostle says they
are ―fellow-workers for the kingdom of God.‖ Usually in Paul the kingdom of God has a
future reference, designating the believer‘s inheritance in the age to come (1 Cor 6:9, 10;
15:50; Gal 5:21; 1 Thess 2:12), and he retains the expression ―the kingdom of Christ‖ for
its present aspect (see on 1:13). However, Romans 14:17 shows that the kingdom of God
has a present side to it and this appears to be its significance here. According to Acts 28:30,
31 Paul is said to have spent these two years in Rome ―proclaiming the kingdom of God
and telling the story of the Lord Jesus Christ‖; during that time these three Jewish
Christians assisted (or carried on their mission, if Ellis‘ interpretation is correct) and proved
to be (oi[tine", as a relative of quality, specifies their character) a great comfort to him
(parhgoriva, ―consolation,‖ ―comfort,‖ occurs only here in the NT; cf. 4 Macc 5:12; 6:1. It
often appears on funeral inscriptions, e.g. Epigr Graec 204, 12, ―I have you as a comfort
[parhgorivhn] even among the dead,‖ also 261, 19, etc, used of consolation in the face of
death‘s reality; see BAG, 626, MM, 494, and Lohse, 173, for further instances).


    12. Epaphras also sends a special greeting to the congregation. The apostle has already
mentioned him earlier in the letter as the one from whom the Colossians had learned the
truth of the gospel (1:7). As a native of Colossae (oJ ejx uJmw`n) he had been the evangelist in
his home town, as well as at Laodicea and Hierapolis, apparently having been sent there by
Paul (see on 1:7). The latter calls Epaphras ―a slave of Christ Jesus‖ (dou`lo" Cristou`
[ÆIhsou`]), a term which he elsewhere applies only to himself (Rom 1:1) and to Timothy
(Phil 1:1). Epaphras is given this title of honor which speaks of him as an obedient slave of
his Lord in the same service as Paul (at 1:7 he is called duvndoulo", ―a fellow-servant,‖ a
term also applied to Tychicus, 4:7). In fact, the apostle goes out of his way to stress the
close correspondence between his own ministry and that of Epaphras. Both are involved in
the same struggle for the gospel (see below). Both are committed to urgent intercessory
prayer as part of that struggle (1:9–11) while both are concerned for the full perfection and
maturity of the Christians at Colossae and in the Lycus valley generally (1:28, 29; 2:1–5).
    pavntote ajgwnizovmeno" uJpe;r uJmw`n ejn tai`" proseucai`". ―Regularly striving (for
the gospel) through intercessory prayer for you.‖ Epaphras was intimately acquainted with
the affairs of the congregation. He, perhaps as no other, knew of the destructive nature of
the false teaching and responded in regular, urgent intercession. The verb ajgwnizovmeno"
(―striving‖) has already been used (1:29; cf. the cognate noun ajgwvn, ―struggle,‖ 2:1) of
Paul‘s own costly apostolic mission, understood as a striving for the gospel (so Pfitzner,
Paul, 109, 110). At Philippians 1:30 the believers at Philippi are said to be involved in the
same struggle (tou; aujt;n ajgw`na e[conte") for the gospel as the apostle (cf. Rom
15:30–32). Here Epaphras is said to be engaged in the same struggle (ajgwnizovmeno",
―striving,‖ occurs in connection with Paul‘s colleague; dou`lo" Cristou` ÆImsou`, ―a slave
of Christ Jesus,‖ seems to tie his ministry in with Paul‘s; the purpose of his struggle on
behalf of his fellow-believers at Colossae is phrased in similar terms to the goal of Paul‘s
own activities, 1:28; 2:2; while povno", ―toil,‖ v 13, places him alongside Paul; Pfitzner,
Paul, 125) and this finds particular expression in urgent and unceasing intercessions for his
countrymen (pavntote, ―always,‖ together with ejn tai`" proseucai`", lit. ―in the prayers,‖
refers to regular petitions being offered for the readers; it has already been suggested that
the plurals ―we give thanks,‖ 1:3, and ―we pray,‖ 1:9, draw attention to the regular
gathering together for prayer by Paul and his colleagues in connection with the Colossian
Christians, see on 1:3, 9). Although Pfitzner (Paul, 128) is probably correct in recognizing
that Paul‘s struggle (agon) is ―untiring toil and labour, an intense wrestling and struggle for
the spread, growth and strengthening of the faith as the goal of his mission,‖ such striving
comes to expression in Epaphras‘ petition.
At another level Paul was no doubt aware of the strenuousness of intercessory prayer (note
his frequent references to the need for continued, unceasing intercessions) and such notions
were probably not far from his thoughts in this passage (he was no doubt aware of a Jewish
understanding of prayer, rooted in Jacob‘s well-known struggle with God, Gen 32:24–32;
note too the central example in the NT, the struggle of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane:
―And being in anguish [ajgwniva] he prayed more earnestly,‖ Luke 22:44).


     i[na staqh`te tevleioi kai; peplhroforhmevnoi ejn panti; qelhvmati tou` feou` . The
substance of Epaphras‘ request (Robertson, Grammar, 991, Du Plessis, Perfection, 204,
and note O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings, 30, regarding the different terms employed
to describe the contents of prayers: e.g. object, subject, substance and purport) is that the
Colossians ―may stand forth perfect and be filled with everything that is God‘s will.‖
staqhvte (―you may stand‖) is a passive voice and points to the divine activity. The
reference to perfection (tevleio") touches on one of the key issues at Colossae in which
members of the congregation were encouraged by the false teachers to seek maturity or
perfection through their philosophy (2:8) with its ascetic practices, vis ionary experiences
and special revelations, rather than through Christ. Epaphras‘ concern, however, was like
Paul‘s, namely, to ―present every man perfect (tevleio") in Christ‖ (1:28 see on that verse).
To this end Paul toils, ―striving‖ (ajgwnizovmeno") with all the energy which he mightily
inspires within me‖ (1:29), and to this end Epaphras strives in prayer.
The maturity or perfection in Christ is further defined by the following expression ―filled
with everything that is God‘s will‖ (peplhroforhmrvnoi ejn panti; qelhvmati tou` qeou`).
The unusual verb plhroyorevw (see BAG, 670, and Delling, TDNT 6, 309, 310; the cognate
noun plhroforiva, ―fullness,‖ appears at 2:2) can mean either ―convince fully‖ (which is
its significance at Rom 4:21 and 14:5) or ―fill,‖ ―fulfill‖ (so 2 Tim 4:5, 17). Moule, 138,
prefers the former and understands the phrase ―in all the will of God‖ as attached to the
verb. He thus renders the whole expression: ―That you may stand firm in all the will of God
… mature and complete (or convinced)‖ (see also Dibelius-Greeven). On this view
Epaphras prays that the readers may be ―fully convinced and certain‖ of the truth of Paul‘s
gospel. But in our judgment is is better to regard the verb as taking the place of the more
frequently used synonym plhrovw (―fill,‖ ―fulfill‖; 1:9, 19; 2:9, 10; BAG, 670, notes that in
this text as elsewhere some manuscripts replace the former verb with the more common
plhrovw). The participle here reminds us of the teaching on ―fullness‖ (plhvrwma) which
runs through the heresy as well as Paul‘s corrective (cf. Delling, TDNT 6, 310, Martin, NCB,
134, and Ladd, RevExp 70 [1973] 511). Accordingly, the prayer addressed to God recalls
the polemic against the ―philosophy.‖ Christ is the one in whom the whole fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily (2:9). Only in him is fullness to be found. And the readers have
been filled in Christ (2:10). Paul‘s co-worker now prays that they will stand firmly as
―perfect,‖ an eschatological perfection that occurs when they are ―filled with everything
that is God‘s will‖ (the preposition ejn, follows the participle and signifies what one is
―filled with,‖ BDF, para. 172, Lohse, 173; also ―the will of God‖ is understood as a totality
which has its outworking in a variety of circumstances, cf. Delling, TDNT 8, 75, Schrage,
Einzelgebote, 169). Once again it is noted that an emphasis in the letter on what has already
been done in Christ in no way obviates the need to grow in him. The readers have already
been filled in Christ. Epaphras now prays earnestly that they will attain to that
eschatological perfection and fullness in him on the final day, as they make progress here
and now.


    13. Paul digresses to add an explicit testimony that Epaphras works tirelessly on behalf
of the congregations in the Lycus valley. Why he had to work so hard (e[cei polu;n povnon)
is not indicated, though all kinds of suggestions have been made: that he had done his best
to answer the claims of the heresy and then left Colossae to seek Paul‘s advice as to how to
deal with the heretical propaganda (Lohmeyer, 169); or, that he had deserted his post
having failed through incompetence to meet the arguments of the heretics and now needed
to have his actions justified by Paul (Masson, 156). But there is nothing to suggest the latter
reconstruction, and Paul‘s testimony is high praise indeed for one who had worked so hard.
povno" (―hard labor,‖ ―toil‖; ―pain,‖ ―distress,‖ ―affliction,‖ BAG, 691) only turns up four
times in the NT and three of these are in the Book of the Revelation (with the meaning
―pain,‖ or ―distress,‖ 16:10, 11; 21:4). The term was a common one for struggle in battle
and here, like the ajgwvn (―struggle‖) word-group (see on v 12), is related to Paul and
Epaphras‘ toil for the gospel.
    uJpe;r uJmw`n kai; tw`n ejn Laodikeiva/ kai; tw`n ejn ïIerapovlei. ―For you as well as for
those at Laodicea and Hierapolis.‖ From the conjunction of the three names it is probable
that Epaphras was the evangelist of all three congregations. He is commended by Paul to all
three for his future ministry in the Lycus valley presumably because the dangers of the
―philosophy‖ were affecting the whole area and his presence, under God, would be needed
once again. We know little about the character of the churches in Hierapolis and Laodicea
(the name Hierapolis means ―sacred city‖ [on the spelling see BDF, para. 115(2)] and lay
about twelve miles north-west of Colossae and six miles north of Laodicea; the latter,
founded by Antiochus II about the middle of the third century B.C., lay further down the
Lycus valley than Colossae). One of the seven letters in the Revelation is addressed to
Laodicea (Rev 3:14–22). Apparently there were well-established churches in both cities and
Epaphras had, under God, substantially contributed to their life and growth. See on verses
15, 16.
    Within the list of greetings the name of Epaphras has been specially emphasized (cf.
1:7) and the question has been raised as to how this emphasis fits in with the origin and
purpose of the letter. Marxsen (Introduction, 177–86) has argued that one of the chief
reasons for this document, which is ―a kind of pastoral letter‖ (180) was to give an
apostolic authorization to Epaphras whose teaching represents the mind of Paul. The letter
derives from the post-Pauline period—Paul himself would not have attacked the heresy in
this manner. Epaphras stands in an apostolic succession now that the apostle is no longer
alive. These characteristics, according to Marxsen, bear the marks of the ―early
catholicism‖ of the subapostolic age.
But the statements in the text give no basis for such far-reaching reconstructions. No
passage can justify the assertion that Colossians is ―a kind of pastoral letter‖ along the lines
Marxsen suggested. The typical nature of Epaphras‘ office is nowhere mentioned, and it
ought not to be overlooked that other persons in addition to Epaphras are especially
mentioned (cf. Tychicus, 4:7). The title of honor, ―a slave of Christ Jesus,‖ has no official
ring about it (cf. Phil 1:1 with reference to Timothy), while there is no suggestion of
ongoing authority or apostolic succession bound up with any single person. Rather, there is
a consciousness of brotherly service (in fact, Paul calls himself a ―deacon,‖ 1:24, and
regards Epaphras as a fellow-servant of Christ, along with Tychicus, 4:7). Epaphras has
founded the church (1:7), knew the destructive nature of the heresy as no other did (with
the possible exception of Paul himself to whom Epaphras had reported the situation),
obviously had a deep-seated concern for his fellow-Christians and continued to pray
earnestly for their perfection and fullness. Epaphras was after all ―one of them‖ as Paul
especially mentions (oJ ejx uJmw`n, ―one of you,‖ immediately follows Epaphras‘ name in v
12). This actual background can satisfactorily explain the prominence given to him (for a
critique of Marxsen‘s reconstructions see especially Ernst, 242–44, and Martin, NCB, 135;
note also Lohse‘s variations [175–77, and in Veritas, 189–94] on Marxsen‘s treatment
together with Ollrog‘s careful criticisms [Paulus, 238–40]; see Introduction xlvii–xlix).


     14. Luke and Demas add their greetings. Both names recur in Philemon 24 as Paul‘s
fellow-workers and at 2 Timothy 4:10, 11. Only here is Luke (on the name Louka`" see
BAG, 480) called ―the beloved physician‖ (oJ ijatro;" oJ ajgaphtov"), and this has led to
speculation that he was Paul‘s doctor during his imprisonment. But there is no evidence for
this. Luke‘s profession was an unusual one so Paul mentions it, yet without further
emphasis.
     It is mainly on the basis of this verse, which separates him from Jewish Christians (oiJ
o[nte" ejk peritomh`", v 11), that Luke was regarded as a Gentile Christian. Although this
is possible, it is by no means certain, and if Ellis‘ arguments above about ―those of the
circumcision‖ referring not to Jewish Christians generally but to one group within a
twofold diaspora mission are correct, then it is possible he was a Hellenistic Jew (see E. E.
Ellis, The Gospel of Luke NCB; London: Nelson, 1966) 52, 53; and note the comments
above; Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East, 437, 438, favored identifying him with the
Lucius of Rom 16:21).
     Little is known about Demas. In 2 Timothy 4:10 he is mentioned: ―For Demas, in love
with this present world, has deserted me.‖ This statement seems to suggest that some
temporal interest took Paul‘s fellow-worker (Phlm 24) off to Thessalonica at a time when
the apostle would have valued his continued presence (Bruce, 308).
     15. ajspavsasqe tou;" ejn Laodikeiva/ ajdelfouv". Paul now asks the Colossians to
convey his greetings to their fellow-Christians at Laodicea, which lay ten miles to the west.
It is by no means clear why the apostle should send special greetings to the brethren in
Laodicea when, according to the following verse, he is sending a separate letter to that
church (Meyer, 477, supposed, without sufficient justification, that the brothers [oiJ
ajdelfoiv] are a church distinct from the Laodicean church but in a filial relation with it
meeting in the same house; Lightfoot, 241: the brothers are perhaps a Colossian family
resident in Laodicea). Dibelius-Greeven, 52, suggested he wished to cement relations
between the two churches in this way.
kai; Nuvmfan kai; th;n katÆ oi\kon aujth`" ejkklhsivan. ―And Nympha and the church that is
in her house.‖ It cannot be determined with certainty whether the greeting to Nuvmfan,
(Nympha) refers to a man (Numfa`", Nymphas, an abbreviated form of Numfovdwro",
Nymphrodorus; cf. Epaphras for Epaphroditus) or to a woman whose name was Nuvmfa
(Nympha). Since the earliest manuscripts had no accents by which the masculine and
feminine forms might be distinguished, the only ancient evidence lies in the personal
pronoun which follows‘ ―in her/his/their house‖: (katÆ oi\                       )—the
manuscripts vary considerably (see the textual note above), but on balance it appears
preferable to understand the reference to a woman and render the whole phrase: ―Nympha
and the church that is in her house.‖


    House-churches (on the meaning and use of ejkklhsiva see 57–61), are often mentioned
in the NT letters. On occasion a whole congregation in one city might be small enough to
meet in the home of one of its members, and it must be remembered that it was not until
about the middle of the third century that early Christianity owned property for purposes of
worship (see O. Cullmann, Early Christian Worship. Tr A. S. Todd and J. B. Torrance [SBT
10; London: SCM , 1953] 9, 10). In other places house-churches appear to have been smaller
circles of fellowship within the larger group. In addition to Nympha‘s house in Laodicea
we know that in Colossae Philemon‘s house was used as a meeting-place (Phlm 2). At
Philippi Lydia‘s home seems to have been used in this way (Acts 16:15, 40) while at
Corinth Gaius is described as ―host … to the whole church‖ (Rom 16:23, the qualification
―whole,‖ o{lh, would be unnecessary if the Christians at Corinth only ever met as a single
group and implies that smaller groups also existed in the city; cf. 1 Cor 14:23). Aquila and
Priscilla extended the hospitality of their home to house groups in the successive cities
where they lived, e.g., in Ephesus (1 Cor 16:19) and Rome (Rom 16:5). Concerning the
details of these housechurches we know little (note Banks, Idea, 45–50, and 226, 227, for
further bibliographical details).
    16. Paul‘s next instructions are significant. First, he expects the contents of this letter to
be read out in the congregation. ejpistolhv (a ―letter,‖ ―epistle,‖ BAG, 300, 301), a word
which occurs some twenty-four times in the NT, here refers to the present letter (as Rom
16:22; 1 Thess 5:27; and 2 Thess 3:14: these latter verses are in the nature of a postscript,
so Abbott, 304). ajnaginwvskw, which in classical Greek had a range of meanings including
to ―know exactly,‖ ―know again,‖ ―acknowledge,‖ in the NT is found only with the meaning
―read,‖ ―read aloud.‖ Usually reading the OT Scriptures was meant (cf. the fourteen
Synoptic references, Acts 8:28, etc), particularly in the synagogue service (Luke 4:16; Acts
13:15, 27; 15:21; 2 Cor 3:14, 15), but as here it was used of reading a letter (Acts 15:31; 2
Cor 1:13; 3:2) especially in the congregation (parÆ uJmi`n, ―among you,‖ so Riesenfeld,
TDNT 5, 732, is almost equivalent to ejn … ejkklhsiva/, ―in … the assembly‖). The Epistles
of the NT were from the first intended to be read aloud in the Christian assembly (showing
that they ranked equally with the OT), a point which is attested in one of Paul‘s earliest
letters where he uses strong language in commanding that his letter be read aloud to all the
brethren (1 Thess 5:27; Martin, NCB, 137, rightly observes that Marxsen‘s further argument,
Introduction, 185, that the public reading of Paul‘s epistolary correspondence is a mark of
subapostolic Christianity and therefore Colossians is a later post-Pauline writing, falls
down).
Second, the Colossians are then to pass on this letter, or perhaps a copy of it, so that (poievw
i{na means to ―cause that,‖ cf. John 11:37; Rev 13:15) it may be read in the congregation at
Laodicea also.
     Third, they are to obtain a certain letter from Laodicea and have it read publicly in
church at Colossae. Much ink has been spilled, to little purpose, endeavoring to determine
what this ―letter from Laodicea‖ (th;n ejk Daodikeiva") actually was: (a) several of the
early church fathers (Chrysostom, Theodore of Mopsuestia, and Theodoret) together with
many other later writers including Beza, supposed this to have been a letter written from
Laodicea to Paul. But by far the most likely meaning of the phrase is that the Colossians
were to procure the letter from Laodicea (so Robertson, Grammar, 600, BDF, para. 437), an
interpretation clearly supported by the context (so Dibelius-Greeven, 52, who considers the
expression is from the standpoint of the Colossians and note Abbott‘s comments, 304, 305;
i{na kai; uJmei`", ―that you too,‖ corresponds to the previous i{na kaiv, ―that also,‖ which
refers to the Laodiceans reading the Colossians‘ letter; the parallelism implies that the
Laodiceans, like the Colossians, will have received a letter, cf. Moule, 138, Bruce, 310,
Loymeyer, 170, Anderson, JBL 85 [1966] 436, 437, Lohse, 174, 175, Martin, NCB, 138, and
Schweizer, 179). (b) Marcion identified this letter with the Epistle to the Ephesians (a
connection made in 1707 by John Mill and which received abundant support from
Lightfoot, 272–98; note also J. Rutherford, ―St. Paul‘s Epistle to the Laodiceans,‖ ExpTim
19 [1907–08] 311–14). However, Ephesians was almost certainly written after Colossians,
and not simply to one church in the province of Asia. If it was written after Colossians, then
it is unlikely to have been mentioned in Colossians, unless 4:16 is a later addition but of
this there is no evidence (Marcion‘s Apostolic Canon gave the title ―To the Laodiceans‖ to
the Epistle to the Ephesians, perhaps because it lacked the words ―at Ephesus‖ in the first
verse and he found what appeared to be a pointer to its destination in Col 4:16, so Bruce,
310, 311, following Souter). (c) The Epistle to Philemon has been identified with the
―epistle from Laodicea,‖ (J. Knox, Philemon among the Letters of Paul. 2nd ed. [London:
Collins, 1960] 38–47), but this letter was private (see the full discussion of this point) and
the delicacy of its appeal would be destroyed if Paul directed it to be read in public.
Further, Philemon lived at Colossae (according to Col 4:9 Onesiumus is a slave of
Philemon at Colossae) not Laodicea. (d) No extant Pauline letter seems adequately to fit the
description and so we are left with the conclusion that the letter to the Laodiceans has not
survived (the reference to a letter not obviously included in the canon led, at a later date, to
the fabrication of the apocryphal ―Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans,‖ which was made up
of sentences gleaned from other Pauline letters; cf. the detailed treatment of Lightfoot,
272–98, Hennecke-Schneemelcher 2, 128–32).
Perhaps it perished accidentally (P. N. Harrison, ―Onesimus and Philemon,‖ ATR 32 [1950]
268–94, suggested it may have been destroyed during the earthquake in the Lycus valley of
A.D. 60–61; Schmauch in the Beiheft to Lohmeyer‘s commentary, 85, considers the letter
was meant for a splinter group of the Laodicean church which resided at Colossae and was
destroyed once the church at Laodicea was united—but there is no evidence for this) and
was not the only Pauline letter to have been lost (according to the most natural reading of 1
Cor 5:9 Paul had written an earlier letter to the Corinthians which has not survived).
    Perhaps the Laodicean church required a letter along similar lines to the Epistle to the
Colossians; yet the two were sufficiently different for Paul to direct that each letter should
be read in the other church (Anderson, JBL 85 [1966] 436–40, submitted the view that
Epaphras wrote the epistle to the Laodiceans because of his inability to accompany
Tychicus on the return to the Lycus valley. Anderson claims we cannot discover a
sufficient motive for Paul‘s writing the second letter. But this does not mean such a motive
does not exist and, furthermore, why does not Paul say it is Epaphras‘ letter?). The
philosophical ideas which were gaining currency in Colossae were probably very much
alive in the Lycus neighborhood so that the exchange of both was important.
    From this admonition one can understand how Paul‘s letters would be copied.
disseminated and collected at an early date (Lohse, 175).
    17. kai; ei[pate ÆArcivppw/ Blevpe th;n diakonivan hÔn parevlaBe" ejn kurivw/ i[na
aujth;n plhroi`". A final word is directed to one member of the congregation—Archippus:
―See to it that you complete the ministry you have received in the Lord.‖ Archippus (
[Arcippo" is widely attested as a proper name, so BAG, 113) is called ―our fellow-soldier‖
by Paul at Philemon 2 (oJ sust ratiwvth" hJmw`n; he is a member of Philemon‘s household,
perhaps Philemon and Apphia‘s son: see 273), a designation employed figuratively of those
who devote themselves to the service of the gospel (Phil 2:25). According to 2 Timothy
2:2, 3 in the context of adherence to the apostolic teaching Timothy is encouraged to endure
hardship ―as a good soldier of Christ Jesus‖ (wJ" kalo;" stratiwvth" Cristou` ÆIhsou`).
Most commenators recognize the difficulty of determining precisely what Archippus‘ task
was. Knox (Philemon) imagined that Archippus was the owner of the slave, Onesimus, and
that the letter to Philemon was really addressed to Archippus. In this case, the latter‘s
―ministry‖ was that of receiving Onesimus as a brother. But this view is to be rejected (see
the critique below 266–268) along with Goodspeed‘s suggestion that the task was that of
appeasing or smoothing over Philemon because of the return of Onesimus. There is no
indication that his ministry (diakoniva) was that of a deacon (diakoniva describes the
discharge of service, not the exercise of the office of a deacon, Beyer, TDNT 2, 88), nor that
he was to make a collection.
Merklein (>Amt, 337–40; cf. Zeilinger, Jesus, 185–88), who understands diavkono"
(―minister‖) and diakoniva (―ministry‖) as traditional terms within Colossians, considers the
ministry of preaching is the service Archippus is to fulfill. It is a ministry he has received in
the Lord (parevlabe" ejn kurivw/; paralanbavnw is employed for the receiving of a tradition,
see on 2:6) and involves the proclamation of the Pauline gospel (both Merklein and
Zeilinger draw attention to the cluster of terms used in this connection: paralambavnw,
―receive,‖ 2:6; plhrovw, ―fulfill,‖ 1:25; and diavkono", ―minister,‖ 1:23, 25). As such
Archippus is the guarantor to the Colossian congregation that they have received the
apostolic gospel (for a qualification of this approach to traditional terms with special
reference to Epaphras, see the Introduction xlvii–xlix).
     18. The conclusion of the letter is brief. Having finished dictating, Paul takes up his pen
to add a personal greeting in his own handwriting. The apostle always concluded his letters
autobiographically even where there is no explicit acknowledgment of it (see Gamble‘s
recent discussion and interaction with recent epistolary literature, History, 76–80, together
with his treatment of 2 Thess 3:17). His personal signatures occur frequently (1 Cor 16:21;
2 Cor 10:1; Gal 6:11; Col 4:18; 2 Thess 3:17 and Philem 19) and were a common epistolary
technique in the first century (Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East, 158, 159). Paul
apparently employed the autograph with special nuances: because of a concern that forged
letters in his name might be sent to churches or individuals (2 Thess 2:2), to give a
quasi-legal commitment with his personal certification (Philem 19), or to add special
emphasis to what has been said (so the reference to ―large characters‖ in Gal 6:11).
     mnhmoneuvetev mou tw`n sesmw`n. ―Remember my bonds‖ is an appeal that is touching
in its brevity and simplicity. The verb mnhmoneuvw, to ―remember,‖ also conveys the idea of
―recognize‖ or ―acknowledge‖ (Michel, TDNT 4, 682, 683) and so several have suggested
the apostle is summoning the Colossians to respect his authority (Lohse, 177, Martin, NCB,
141; Philem 9 is usually drawn in, dubiously in our judgment, in support of this notion; see
the exegesis below 290). But this is not really the point at issue. Paul has not had to assert
his authority throughout the letter where it might have been expected, so why now? Rather,
one biblical meaning of mnhmoneuvw is that of calling something to God‘s remembrance or
of mentioning something to him in prayer (LXX 2 Sam 14:11; Ps 62:6; cf. Ps 6:5; in the NT
note the use of mneivan poiou`mai, to ―make mention,‖ i.e. in prayer: Rom 1:9; Eph 1:16; 1
Thess 1:2; Philem 4; cf. 2 Tim 1:3; note Bartels, NIDNTT 3, 232, 242, and BAG, 525).
Accordingly, these words are essentially a request for their continued prayers on his behalf
(see vv 3, 4; Bruce, 313, cf. Wiles, Prayers, 260, who observes that such requests for prayer
are frequently found in the closing passages of letters in the Pauline corpus: Rom 15:30–32;
Eph 6:18–20; 1 Thess 5:25; 2 Thess 3:1–3; Philem 22; cf. Heb 13:18. Gamble, History, 81,
notes that ―prayer and remembrance are closely bound up in the Pauline letters‖). That is
not to suggest, however, that such remembrance could not take other forms as well (note
Meyer, 483, Abbott, 307, 308), e.g., interest, concern, etc.
    hJ cavri" meq uJmw`n. ―Grace be with you.‖ As the opening epistolary greetings or
benedictions of Paul‘s letters are quite stylized so too the cavri" (―grace‖) benediction was
a frequent and formally consistent element in the conclusions of Paul‘s letters. Its
uniformity of phraseology, structure and position is clear when a comparison is made (Rom
16:20, 24; 1 Cor 16:23; 2 Cor 13:13; Gal 6:18; Eph 6:24; Phil 4:23; Col 4:18; 1 Thess 5:28;
2 Thess 3:18; 1 Tim 6:12; 2 Tim 4:22; Titus 3:15; Philem 25; cf. Heb 13:25; Rev 22:21).
Such a benediction brings the letter to a definitive conclusion and corresponds formally to
the final wish of the secular letter (e[rrwso, ―farewell,‖ cf. Gamble, History, 65–67). The
final benediction picks up the introductory greeting (1:2) where Paul desires that the
Colossians may apprehend more fully the grace of God in which they stand (cf. Rom 5:2).
At the same time the note of confidence is also struck (on the question as to whether the
verb which has been omitted is an indicative, ejstin, ―is,‖ or optative, ei[h, ―be,‖ see
Gamble, History, 66, 67, who claims that as a blessing the ―grace-benediction‖ is neither a
wish nor a statement but incorporates aspects of both: ―Its wish character remains intact,
even though qualified by confidence of its effectiveness‖). God‘s grace will sustain the
community, for it is by grace alone that they will stand.

Explanation
    Paul concludes his letter to the Colossians in his usual way with personal greetings and
instructions. First, he mentions Tychicus and Onesimus, bearers of the letter, who will
convey his personal news to the congregation which would naturally be interested to know
how he and Epaphras, the founder of the church, were getting on in prison. Next he sends
greetings from six of his associates who are acquainted with the congregation: three are of
Jewish birth (Aristarchus, Mark and Jesus Justus) and three from a Gentile background
(Epaphras, Luke and Demas). The first three are the only Jewish Christians among his
fellow-workers for the kingdom of God and Paul is grateful for their faithful presence.
Among the latter group the apostle singles out Epaphras for special mention. As a native of
Colossae he had been the evangelist in his home town (as well as at Laodicea and
Hierapolis). He had engaged in the same struggle for the gospel as Paul and this found
particular expression in his urgent intercessory prayers for the Colossians that they might
come to fullness and maturity in Christ. Then Paul adds his own greetings and brief
instructions: he expects the contents of this letter to be read out in the congregation. The
Colossians are then to pass on the letter, or perhaps a copy of it, so that it may be read in
the congregation at Laodicea as well, while the letter which has gone to Laodicea is to be
read publicly in church at Colossae. Archippus, a member of the congregation, is told to
complete the ministry he has received in the Lord. The final salutation is written in Paul‘s
own hand and contains a request to remember his bonds, together with a benediction for
God‘s grace.




Philemon


Introduction to Philemon
Bibliography
Bruce, F. F. Paul, 393–406. Gayer, R. Die Stellung des Sklaven in den paulinischen Gemeinden
und bei Paulus. Zugleich ein sozialgeschichtlich vergleichender Beitrag zur Wertung des Sklaven in
der Antike. Bern: Lang, 1976. Greeven, H. ―Prüfung der Thesen von J. Knox zum Philemonbrief.‖
TLZ 79 (1954) 373–78. Guthrie, D. Introduction, 247–54. Hainz, J. . Strukturen
paulinischer Gemeinde-Theologie und Gemeinde-Ordnung. BU 9, Regensburg: F. Pustet, 1972,
199–209. Harrison, P. N. ATR 32 (1950) 268–94. Jang, L. K. Der Philemonbrief im
Zusammenhang mit dem theologischen Denken des Apostels Paulus. Bonn: unpublished thesis,
1964. Knox, J. Philemon. Kümmel, W. G. Introduction, 348–50. Suhl, A. ―Der Philemonbrief als
Beispiel paulinischer Paränese.‖ Kairos 15 (1973) 267–79. Wickert, U. ―Der
Philemonbrief—Privatbrief oder apostolisches Schreiben?‖ ZNW 52 (1961) 230–38.



THE NATURE OF THE LETTER
    The letter to Philemon is the shortest of all in the Pauline corpus (consisting of a mere
335 words in the original Greek), and is more closely related to the ordinary private and
personal letters of the time—related in a way that others addressed by Paul either to
communities or groups of communities are not (most scholars have recognized that
Philemon stands near the ancient private letter: so for example, P. Wendland, Die
urchristlichen Literaturformen. 3rd ed. [Tübingen: Mohr, 1912] 280, 281; note also Doty,
Letters, 22, citing the work of J. L. White). This fact, however, does not indicate that the
letter is simply a piece of private correspondence (cf. Roller, Formular, 147). Kümmel
(Introduction, 249) states that Philemon is ―like the longer letters of Paul … not private
correspondence, but the instrument of early Christian missionary work‖ (cf. Suhl, Kairos 15
[1973] 267–79).
The precise nature of the letter to Philemon and the reasons for its inclusion in the canon
have been the subject of discussion among scholars for some time—not least since 1935
when John Knox published his important little book, Philemon among the Letters of Paul (a
revised edition appeared twenty-five years later). Knox considered that the letter was
included in the Pauline corpus by one who played a prominent part in its
publication—Onesimus, the runaway slave mentioned in this letter who, according to
tradition, later became bishop of Ephesus.



THE RECIPIENT
    The recipient of this letter is Philemon, who is described as Paul‘s ―beloved
fellow-worker‖ (v 1). Other names mentioned in the salutation are the sister Apphia, the
fellow-soldier Archippus and the community assembled in Philemon‘s house (v 2). Since
Colossians expressly mentions that Onesimus (4:9) and Archippus (4:17) belong to the
church at Colossae, it can be assumed that Philemon, from whose house the slave
Onesimus fled, also lived there. Philemon, who appears to have become a Christian through
Paul (see on v 19)—possibly in Ephesus—had given concrete expression of his love for the
saints (vv 5, 7). Apphia, whose name was peculiarly Phrygian and is mentioned alongside
Philemon‘s, was probably his wife. Although Archippus has been thought by some to be a
son of Philemon and Apphia, we have no certain means of knowing whether this is so or
not.
    According to Knox (Philemon) the letter was addressed to Archippus, Onesimus‘
owner. It is he rather than Philemon who is referred to in the second person singular from
verses 4 to 24 of the letter, for it was in Archippus‘ house that the church met. Philemon
was overseer of the churches of the Lycus valley. He lived at Laodicea and Paul arranged
that the letter should reach Philemon first. Philemon would then use his influence with
Archippus to ensure that Onesimus was released from slavery and was free to assist Paul in
his ministry.
In spite of Knox‘s many penetrating insights (especially his comments concerning the
reason for the epistle‘s inclusion within the canon, and whether or not Paul‘s request
for/concerning Onesimus was accepted), his thesis has not found general acceptance among
NT scholars (partial agreement with Knox has been expressed by Greeven, TLZ 79 [1954]
373–78) and according to Kümmel (Introduction, 349) is ―controverted by the natural
exegesis of Philem 1, 2 and Col 4:17.‖ Philemon‘s name appears first in verse 1, and this,
together with the phrase katÆ oi\kovn sou (―in your house‖, v 2) tells against Archippus as
being the one primarily addressed (so Moule, 16, 17, among others; even in his second
edition Knox has not effectively answered these criticisms of his reconstruction).



THE OCCASION OF THE LETTER
The occasion of the letter may be inferred from its contents though some of the details are
obscure. A slave named Onesimus had wronged his owner Philemon who was a Christian
living at Colossae (vv 1, 2: cf. Col 4:9, 17) and had run off. Onesimus had in some way
come into contact with the apostle, perhaps as a fellow-prisoner. However, if he had been
apprehended by the authorities and thrown into prison it would have been their
responsibility to take him back to his master. Perhaps he had sought refuge in Paul‘s
company because he had heard his name mentioned in the house of his Christian master
and had now hastened to him for help in his trouble.
     The precise nature of Onesimus‘ offense is not certain and our understanding turns in
part on the meaning of verse 18. It is usually assumed Onesimus had stolen his master‘s
money and then absconded (so Caird, 222, 223, and Stuhlmacher, 49, among others who
have made the suggestion with varying degrees of conviction). On the other hand, it is
possible that the words, ―if he has wronged you or owes you anything,‖ simply indicate his
running away meant he owed his master the value of the work that should have been done
(cf. Lohmeyer, 190, Lohse, 204, Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 269, Martin, NCB, 167, and Gayer,
Stellung, 230). Bruce (Paul, 400) wonders whether his master had sent him to fulfill some
commission and Onesimus had overstayed his leave (on the whole discussion see on v 18).
     But whatever the precise reasons for Onesimus‘ flight we do know that in the Roman
world of Paul‘s day slaves did often run away. They joined groups of robbers and brigands,
attempted to disappear in the subcultures of large cities, tried to flee abroad where they
might be absorbed into the workforce, or sought asylum in a temple (cf. Stuhlmacher, 22,
23, and note the literature cited). Onesimus chose none of these methods of escape. Instead
he sought refuge with the imprisoned apostle. Paul took an interest in him and Onesimus
was subsequently converted to the Christian faith (v 10). The apostle clearly developed a
great affection for him (at v 12 he describes him as ―my very heart,‖ ta; ejma; splavgcna)
and benefited from his ministry and service (vv 11, 13). He would dearly have wished to
keep him so that he might take Philemon‘s place at his side in the service of the gospel.
However, he had no right to retain Onesimus: not only would it have been illegal for Paul
to act in this way (see particularly on v 12), but also it would have involved a breach of
Christian fellowship between himself and Philemon (cf. Bruce, Paul, 406). So he sent him
back with an accompanying letter.
     At verse 10 the apostle mentions the fact of his request of Philemon for Onesimus. But
the content of that request is not spelled out until seven verses later when he asks that
Philemon might welcome his runaway slave as he would receive himself (v 17), that is, as a
―beloved brother‖ (v 16). The apostle does not want the reconciliation between Philemon
and Onesimus to collapse because of any demand for compensation, and so he asks that any
outstanding damages resulting from Onesimus‘ flight (or absence) be charged to his own
account. After all, did not Philemon owe his very self to Paul, since the latter was
responsible for his conversion? Yet he refrains from issuing Philemon with any command
(see the discussion on vv 8, 9), or from urging that Onesimus be given his freedom. The
decision is to be Philemon‘s entirely, and Paul refuses to press him to act in any way that
would suggest coercion or an intrusion into that decision (v 14). The apostle is confident
that Philemon will be obedient to the will of God and he adds that the latter ―will do even
more than I say‖ (v 21). These words are tantalizing, and as we read between the lines it
appears best to interpret the ―more‖ as the desire of the apostle for Onesimus to be returned
to him for the service of the gospel (see on v 21).
The bold request for Onesimus is carefully prepared by the writer as he uses gentle
language (vv 8, 9) with its tones of entreaty, then leads on to an appeal for Philemon‘s
willing cooperation and consent (v 14), and finally with his promissory note indicates his
willingness to accept any liability Onesimus may have incurred (v 19). (Note the carefully
structured paragraph of vv 8–20, 284–287.)
     Knox argued that the letter to Philemon (which he took to be the ―letter from Laodicea‖
of Col 4:16) should be read aloud in the church of Colossae to put pressure on Onesimus‘
owner (i.e. Archippus according to Knox; see above 266). But this is impossible. In his
letter to the owner Paul has exercised discretion and tact, graciously making his request,
rather than exercising any authority by way of demand. Also to suggest with Knox that the
letter be read to the assembled church at Colossae would be entirely inconsistent with this
exercise of tact (so Lightfoot, 279, who put the matter clearly: ―Why should a letter,
containing such intimate confidences, be read publicly in the Church, not only at Laodicea
but at Colossae, by the express order of the Apostle? The tact and delicacy of the Apostle‘s
pleading for Onesimus would be nullified at one stroke by the demand for publication.‖ Cf
Harrison, ATR 32 [1950] 280; Bruce, Paul, 404, 405). Further, the inclusion of other
Christians‘ names in the salutation (vv 1, 2) and benedictions (vv 3, 25) is due to Paul‘s
courtesy. The body of the letter is addressed to an individual.
     Wickert (ZNW 52 [1961] 230–38) correctly points out that Paul did not write simply as a
private individual to Philemon, but as an apostle. However, he errs when he considers that
Paul asserted his apostolic authority and made Philemon accede to his demands. This is the
very thing Paul does not do (note the exegesis of vv 8, 9).
It is reasonable to infer from the preservation of the letter in the canon that Paul‘s request to
Philemon about Onesimus was granted. Otherwise the letter would probably have been
destroyed. Bruce (Paul, 406, following Knox, Philemon) claims it was preserved not only
because ―it accomplished its purpose so far as Philemon was concerned, but also because
Onesimus treasured it as his charter of liberty.‖ If the latter did subsequently become
bishop of Ephesus and knew about the collection and publication of the Pauline corpus of
letters, then he may have made sure that his Pauline letter found a place in the collection.



THE STRUCTURE OF THE LETTER
    Paul‘s introductory greeting (vv 1–3) is followed by the thanksgiving paragraph (vv
4–7) which leads into (v 7) the body of the letter where the apostle develops his request for
Onesimus (vv 8–20). A short list of greetings (vv 23, 24) and the benediction (v 25) form
the conclusion.
In this epistle to Philemon the apostle employs the same basic structure he uses elsewhere
in his letters. The thanksgiving paragraph (vv 4–7), which follows the usual introduction, is
a relatively short and simple form of the first type of introductory thanksgiving (see on Col
1:3–8). This passage prepares the ground for the request that is to follow, a point that comes
out in its general emphasis and in the repetition of specific words which the thanksgiving
anticipates. The body of this epistle (vv 8–20), in which the intercession for Onesimus is
made, is carefully structured so that the reader is gradually led to the actual request (see the
section of vv 8–20 entitled ―Form‖). Paul gives a brief description of his situation (vv
8–12), indicating the basis of his appeal and stressing how dear Onesimus has become to
him. He then looks back (vv 13, 14) to the time when the slave came to him seeking refuge,
and tells why he did not keep Onesimus (cf. vv 15, 16). Only at the conclusion of this main
section does he state the content of his request for the first time: ―welcome him as me.‖



PLACE OF ORIGIN AND DATE
    Paul writes as a prisoner (vv 1, 9, 10, 23), and a careful comparison of the names in the
epistle with those of Colossians 4:7–17 shows that this letter was sent from the same place
as Colossians (see above xlix–liv). Tychicus who was entrusted with this epistle had
Onesimus as his companion on the journey to the Lycus valley, the same Onesimus
mentioned in the letter to Philemon (v 12).
The precise location of Paul‘s imprisonment at the time of writing Colossians was
discussed in the introduction to that letter (see xlix–liv), and of the three
possibilities—Rome, Caesarea or Ephesus—it was considered that the balance of
probability lay in favor of Rome. The most likely placing of the two letters is fairly early in
Paul‘s (first) Roman imprisonment, i.e., A.D. 60–61.



AUTHENTICITY
Up to this point it has been assumed that Paul was the author of the letter. Only the most
extreme negative critics have in the past disputed the Pauline authorship of the epistle.
Because of its close connection with Colossians, which was thought to belong to the second
century, the Tübingen school denied its authenticity, although Baur admitted its noble
Christian spirit. The Dutch radical W. C. van Manen also took this line but such an
approach may rightly be consigned to the eccentricities of NT scholarship. The letter was
already included in Marcion‘s canon and there are good reasons for assuming we hear the
authentic voice of Paul. ―It breathes the great-hearted tenderness of the apostle and its
dealing with an intensely difficult situation points to an author of much experience in
handling social problems‖ (Guthrie, Introduction, 250, 251).



THE LETTER OF PHILEMON AND THE QUESTION OF SLAVERY
The epistle brings into vivid focus the whole question of slavery in the early Christian
church. From the ―household table‖ of Colossians 3:18–4:1 (cf. Eph 6:5–9; 1 Cor 7:21–23;
1 Tim 6:1, 2; Titus 2:9, 10; 1 Pet 2:18–21) we have seen that Paul makes the following
points: (a) slaves are involved in ―serving Christ,‖ (b) owners have ―a master in heaven,‖
(c) God deals impartially with master and slave, and (d) both are bond-servants of Christ. In
the letter to Philemon Paul does not take up the question of slavery as such or even a
particular instance of slavery. In his carefully chosen words of verses 16 and 17 (―no longer
as a slave, but as one who is much more than a slave, as a beloved brother … receive him
as you would receive me‖) he is dealing with the issue of brotherly love. He desires that
Onesimus be welcomed back as a Christian brother and treated as he himself would be. He
does not ask that Philemon should receive Onesimus back as a freed man or that he should
free him immediately on his return (against Jang, Philemonbrief, 15; see on v 16).
    Nevertheless as Bruce (Paul, 401) points out: ―What this letter does is to bring us into
an atmosphere in which the institution could only wilt and die.‖ Onesimus as well as
Philemon has been incorporated into the body of Christ and consequently the relationship
of slave to slave owner within the context of the existing structures is to be conducted in the
light of belonging to the same Lord. The relationship between the two men is deepened so
that, in a sense, the terms ―slave‖ and ―master‖ are transcended. And although Onesimus‘
earthly freedom may be of positive value, finally it is of no ultimate significance to him as a
Christian as to whether he is slave or free. In the end what matters is to have accepted
God‘s call and to follow him (cf. 1 Cor 7:21–24, and see on Philem 16).



ANALYSIS OF PHILEMON


VV 1–3
INTRODUCTORY GREETING

4–7
THANKSGIVING AND INTERCESSION FOR PHILEMON

8–20
PAUL‘S PLEA FOR ONESIMUS

21–25
FINAL REMARKS AND GREETINGS




Introductory Greeting (1–3)
Bibliography
(See on Colossians 1:1, 2)

Translation
1
  Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother. To Philemon our dear friend
and fellow-worker, 2to Apphia our sister, Archippus our fellow-soldier and to the church
that meets in your house. 3Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Form/Structure/Setting
The structure of Paul‘s introduction follows the pattern found elsewhere in his letters (see
on Col 1:1, 2) with its mention of author (and his associate), addressee and a greeting.
Comment
     1. Pau`lo" devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou`. ―Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus.‖ While Paul
(on the name see Col 1:1) elsewhere commences his letters with the designations ―a slave
of Christ Jesus‖ (Rom 1:1; cf. Phil 1:1; Tit 1:1) and ―called to be an apostle‖ (Rom 1:1; cf. 1
Cor 1:1; Gal 1:1, 2) or ―an apostle of Christ Jesus‖ (2 Cor 1:1; Eph 1:1; Col 1:1; 1 Tim 1:1;
2 Tim 1:1), in Philemon 1 he calls himself devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou`, ―a prisoner of Christ
Jesus.‖ This unusual expression was corrected in the later manuscript tradition to bring it
into line with the customary Pauline openings, but this text is certainly original (note vv 9
and 13 where the thought is repeated), devsmio" (―prisoner,‖ also Eph 3:1; 4:1; 2 Tim 1:8;
Philem 9, as well as desmov", ―bond,‖ ―fetter,‖ at Phil 1:7, 13, 14, 17; Col 4:18; 2 Tim 2:9)
is best understood of a literal imprisonment (so Kittel, TDNT 2, 43, asserts: ―there can be no
doubt that the actual imprisonment of Paul everywhere underlies the usage [of these
references]‖; see also Lohse, 189, Martin NCB, 158, Jang, Philemonbrief, 22, Hainz,
Ekklesia, 200, Stuhlmacher, 29, and Gayer, Stellung, 228), from which Paul hopes soon to
be released (v 22), rather than a metaphorical bondage (E. R. Goodenough, ―Paul and
Onesimus,‖ HTR 22 [1929] 181–83) or a religious imprisonment (Reitzenstein sought to
explain the meaning from parallels drawn from the mystery religions in which the devotee
in the temple is ―detained‖ by his god; for a critique see Lohse, 189). So at the outset
reference is made to the apostle‘s situation: Paul is ―in prison for the gospel‖ (ejn toi`"
desmoi`" tou` eujaggelivou, v 13; the genitive Cristou` ÆIhsou` in the expression ―prisoner
of Christ Jesus‖ is best understood, with most commentators, to signify Paul has been
imprisoned ―for Christ‘s sake‖; von Soden, 73, adds that the genitive shows Christ is the
owner of the prisoner and the cause of his imprisonment). The authoritative title of
―apostle‖ is dropped, not because Paul has suddenly ceased to be an apostle, but because he
has no intention of appealing to his apostolic authority. He desires to entreat Philemon (vv
8, 9) rather than command, and substitutes for the term ―apostle‖ a ―designation which
would touch his friend‘s heart‖ (Lightfoot, 331, cf. Caird, 218; the reference to Paul‘s
bonds is not to stress the apostle‘s authority as so many continental scholars argue).
Timovqeo" oJ ajdelfov". ―Timothy, our brother.‖ Once again Paul associates Timothy with
himself in the salutation (see on Col 1:1). When Paul names others along with himself in
the address it is usually because of their relations with the church to which the letter is sent.
Timothy was in Paul‘s company for much of his Ephesian ministry (cf. Acts 19:22; 2 Cor
1:1) and may have become acquainted with Philemon there. The mention of Timothy‘s
name in no way suggests he is a joint author of the letter (so most exegetes), much less
because Paul‘s request of Philemon is of general Christian interest (as Jang, Philemonbrief,
22, among others, argues; von Soden, 73, rightly claims that the addition of Timothy‘s
name does not thereby give the writing an official character) or as a means of putting
pressure on Philemon (see the discussion above).
     Filhvmoni tw`/ ajgaphtw`/ kai; sunergw`/ hJmw`n. ―To Philemon our dear friend and
fellow-worker.‖ Philemon (on the frequency of this name, see BAG, 859, and Lightfoot,
301, 302, for examples) whose name appears first is the real recipient of the letter (for a
critique of Knox‘s view that Archippus is the person primarily addressed, see the
Introduction 265). He is called ―beloved‖ (ajgaphtov"), a term which Paul employs
elsewhere to address the Christians at Rome (1:7) and the communities at Corinth (1 Cor
10:14; 15:58; 2 Cor 7:1; 12:19) and Philippi (Phil 2:12, 4:1; cf. 1 Thess 2:8). Here it has
special significance: Philemon is precious to Paul and his colleague(s) (the Greek
expression contains one definite article tw`/, ―the,‖ and one possessive pronoun hJmw`n, ―our,‖
which apply to both nouns ajgaphtw`/, ―beloved,‖ and sunergw`/, ―fellow-worker‖): he
belongs to a community of mutual love and has demonstrated his ―love‖ (ajgavph) in the
past (vv 5, 7). Paul now hopes that ―for love‘s sake‖ (dia; th;n ajgavphn, v 9) Philemon will
grant his request so that Onesimus will be accepted as a ―beloved brother‖ (ajdelfo;"
ajgaphtov", v 16). The note of Christian love, struck in this opening address, echoes
throughout the rest of the epistle (see below 276, etc). Further, Philemon is called Paul‘s
―fellow-worker‖ (sunergov", see on Col 4:11). Ollrog, Paulus, 63–72, has recently
suggested that sunergov" (―fellow-worker‖) was a general or comprehensive designation,
perhaps including others such as diavkonoi, ―ministers,‖ for those who worked together
with Paul as commissioned by God in the task of missionary preaching (Ollrog further
suggests that the Pauline use of the term was distinctive, bound up with the particular
nature of the proclamation of the gospel to Gentiles, Paulus, 67). The term in the first
instance (cf. 1 Cor 3:4–9) describes the nature of the e[rgon (i.e. it is a joint work of
proclaiming Christ) rather than the companionship, the persons with whom one worked.
Whenever Paul wished to express his fellowship with his co-workers he noted this
especially through additions such as ―my‖ or ―our‖ (as here at Phlm 1). Co-workers were
not helpers of the apostle drawn in for his personal service. Rather, they were
commissioned by God for the task of missionary preaching. Philemon, who seems to have
owed his conversion to Paul, may have first met the apostle during the latter‘s ministry at
Ephesus (see on v 19). Perhaps prior to his return to Colossae he had had a part in
preaching the gospel of Christ here. At any rate, Paul regarded him as a valued colleague
and dear friend.
     2. Apphia, Archippus and the church that meets in Philemon‘s house (the sou, ―your,‖
is singular and refers back to Philemon) are also greeted by Paul. They are not named along
with Philemon as recipients of the letter. The matter Paul is dealing with is a personal affair
which concerns Philemon alone and the decision to be arrived at is not a concern of the
entire community. The inclusion of other Christians‘ names in this salutation and the
benedictions (vv 3, 25 where the plural ―you,‖ uJmi`n and uJmw`n, occurs) is due to the
apostle‘s courtesy, but the body of the letter (vv 4–22) is addressed to an individual (for a
critique of the prevailing view that Paul names others in the address since he wants them to
know the contents of the letter and so put pressure on Onesimus‘ owner, see Introduction
267, 268). Apphia (ÆApfiva) was a peculiarly Phrygian name (see the examples cited by
Lightfoot, 304–306, and MM, 73). Dibelius-Greeven, 111, cite an interesting grave
inscription for an Apphia from Colossae: ―Hermas in memory of Apphia his wife, daughter
of Tryphon, a Colossian by birth.‖ Apphia is called ―sister‖ (ajdelfhv) and like Philemon
was a Christian (―a sister in the faith,‖ BAG, 15). Because her name immediately follows
Philemon‘s it has been assumed from early times, probably correctly, that she was his wife
(so Theodoret: ―Paul … adds the name of the wife … to that of the husband,‖ cited by
Lohse, 190). As the person involved in the affairs of the household, she would wish to
know about Onesimus, but the point of mentioning her in the greeting is one of courtesy;
Paul‘s request is addressed to Philemon.
     Archippus (ÒArcippo": see on Col 4:17) is mentioned next and called Paul‘s
―fellow-soldier‖ (sustratiwvth", see BAG, 795, and Bauernfeind, TDNT 7, 701–713). Paul
does not speak of Christians generally as ―soldiers,‖ but instead reserves the term for
himself and his co-workers (Pfitzner, Paul, 161; see also Ollrog, Paulus, 77) designating
those who, like Epaphroditus (Phil 2:25), had played an important part in assisting him in
his missionary labors, and had faithfully stood at his side through persecution and
trial—perhaps even imprisonment. One cannot assert with Lohmeyer, 175, that the term
denotes an appointed leader in the church holding a particular office. Archippus was a
resident of Colossae, possibly a son of Philemon and Apphia (though we have no certain
means of knowing), who was given a special admonition to fulfill the ministry (diavkonia)
which he had received in the Lord (Col 4:17, see 259).
kai; th`/ katÆ oi\kovn sou ejkklhsiva/. ―And the church that meets in your house.‖ The list of
persons greeted by the apostle concludes with the mention of the community that assembles
in Philemon‘s house (the singular pronoun sou, ―your,‖ makes it clear Philemon is the real
recipient of the letter; against Knox, Philemon, 54, see 266). Regarding house-churches see
on Colossians 4:15 and note the literature cited there.
     3. Cavri" uJmi`n kai; eijrhvnh ktl ―Grace to you and peace, etc‖ On the opening
epistolary greetings of Paul‘s letters see Colossians 1:2. Here the greeting (or benediction
or blessing, as it is sometimes called) contains the additional words ―and [from] the Lord
Jesus Christ‖ (kai; »ajpo;¼ kurivou ÆIhsou` Cristou`) and this longer form is the more usual
one. Paul‘s greeting indicates a deep prayerful concern for Philemon, Apphia, Archippus
and the church that meets in Philemon‘s house, that they may understand and appreciate
more fully the grace of God in which they stand and the relationship of peace that God has
established with them in his Son, Jesus Christ.

Explanation
    Paul commences his letter to Philemon in the usual way. After mentioning his own
name as sender he includes that of Timothy who has been in his company for much of his
Ephesian ministry and may have become acquainted with Philemon there. The latter, Paul‘s
dear friend and fellow-worker, is the specific recipient of the epistle (vv 4 etc). Although
Apphia, Archippus and the church that meets in Philemon‘s house are included in Paul‘s
greeting (cf. v 25), this is due to his courtesy but the body of the letter (vv 4–22 are in the
singular) is addressed to one person, Philemon.
Paul‘s greeting indicates a deep prayerful concern for Philemon and his friends that they
may understand and appreciate more fully the grace of God in which they stand and the
relationship of peace that God has established with them.




Thanksgiving   and                                    Intercession                       for
Philemon (4–7)
Bibliography
In addition to the bibliography to Colossians 1:3–8 note also: Suhl, A. Kairos 15 (1973) 267–79.
Wiles, G. P. Prayers, 215–25. Zmijewski, J. ―Beobachtungen zur Struktur des Philemonbriefes.‖
BibLeb 15 (1974) 273–96.
Translation
4
  I always thank my God when I mention you in my prayers, 5because I hear of your love for
all the saints and your faith in the Lord Jesus.6 I pray that your generosity, which arises
from your faith, may lead you effectively into a deeper understanding and experience of
every blessing which belongs to usa as fellow-members in the body of Christ. 7For I have
derived much joy and comfort from your love, because the hearts of the saints have been
refreshed by you, my brother.

Note
a. The phrase ejn hJmi`n (―among us‖) is not as well supported in the manuscript tradition (A C
D K
     y etc) as ejn uJmi`n (―among you‖) which is read by the Textus Receptus and other
important manuscripts (P61 a
 G P
     33 etc). However, the former is preferred since it is more expressive, binding Paul to
the addressee, and it is more likely that copyists would have changed hJmi`n (―us‖) to uJmi`n
(―you‖) to bring it into line with the other second person pronouns in the paragraph.

Form/Structure/Setting
The thanksgiving passage of the letter to Philemon, vv 4–6, as the second main section of
the Pauline letter form (see Doty, Letters, 27–33, and on Col 1:3–8), is the shortest of all in
the Pauline corpus. It comprises a mere forty-seven words and is approximately one
seventh of the letter. This thanksgiving paragraph is short, not only because Philemon is the
briefest of all the Pauline letters, but also since it is formally and functionally more closely
related (as noted above, the thanksgiving passages in the papyrus letters are briefer than
those of Paul) to the ordinary private and personal letters of the time—related in a way that
the other letters in the Pauline corpus, addressed either to communities or groups of
communities, are not.
    Of the two basic types of structure noted in Paul‘s thanksgiving paragraphs (see 8, 9)
the letter to Philemon, as in the companion letter to the Colossians, contains an introductory
thanksgiving of the first type. It is, however, simpler in form than the other examples of this
category having no pronominal phrase (item 4; such as uJpevr sou, ―for you‖), while there is
only one causal participial clause (ajkouvwn sou th;n ajgavphn ktl., ―hearing of your love,‖
etc) and but one object of intercessory prayer (v 6). The basic structure of the passage is as
follows: (1) the verb of thanksgiving (eujcaristw`, ―I give thanks,‖ v 4), then (2) the
personal object (tw`/ qew`/ mou, ―to my God,‖ v 4) indicating the one who is thanked, (3) a
temporal adverb (pavntote, ―always,‖ v 4) denoting the frequency with which thanksgiving
is offered, (4) the pronominal phrase is omitted though its place is taken by means of the
sou, ―you,‖ in (5) the temporal participial clause with its temporal adverbial phrase
(mneivan sou poiouvmeno" ejpi; tw`n proseucw`n, ―when I remember you in my prayers,‖ v
4)—an expression which explains the significance of the preceding adverb pavntote
(―always‖). A causal participial clause (6) ajkouvwn sou th;n ajgavphn ktl. (―for I hear of
your love,‖ etc, v 5) gives the reason which motivates Paul‘s prayer of thanksgiving, while
the final feature of the section (7) is the o{pw"-clause of v 6 which spells out Paul‘s petition
for Philemon and which is paraphrased as follows: ―(I pray) that your generosity, which
arises from your faith, may lead you effectively into a deeper understanding and experience
of every blessing which belongs to us as fellow-members in the body of Christ‖ (for the
detailed exegesis see below).
     Most commentators treat the passage under review as extending from verses 4 to 7 (e.g.
Dibelius-Greeven, 101, Vincent, 177, Friedrich, 192, Carson, 105, Moule, 140, and Lohse,
192). Although this division may be followed for the sake of convenience, it needs to be
noted that the thanksgiving structure extends from verses 4 to 6, reaching its climax in the
o{pw"-clause of verse 6. Verse 7, which refers once more to the love that Philemon has
shown toward the saints, is a smooth and effective transition from the thanksgiving
paragraph to the main purpose of the letter, a purpose which Paul promptly sets forth in
verse 8 (so Schubert, Form, 5, Lohse, 192. Lohmeyer, 192, rightly observed that the
thanksgiving period concluded at the end of v 6: ―With these words the thanksgiving, in a
strict sense, ends‖; also correctly Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 271). Verse 7 is not a report of
Paul‘s prayers for Philemon but is rather a statement telling the recipient why he had been
refreshed and comforted (the attempt of Sanders, JBL 81 [1962] 358, to show that v 7, a
―joygiving,‖ was equivalent to a concluding thanksgiving which ended the period, fails as it
appears to be straining the evidence unduly in an effort to fit the thanksgiving paragraphs
into a liturgical mold).
This whole passage prepares the ground for the request that is to follow, a point that may be
discerned not only in its general emphasis, but also in the repetition of specific words from
the thanksgiving throughout the rest of the letter (Wiles, Prayers, 219). As Knox
(Philemon, 19) has aptly remarked: ―It is the overture in which each of the themes, to be
later heard in a different, perhaps more specific, context, is given an anticipatory hearing.‖
Terms (or their cognates) such as prayer (proseuchv, v 4, cf. v 22), love (ajgavph, v 5, cf. v
9), fellowship (koinwnia;, v 6, cf. v 17), good (ajgaqov", v 6, cf. v 14), heart (splavgcna, v 7,
cf. vv 12, 20), refresh (ajnapauvw, v 7, cf. v 20) and brother (ajdelfev, v 7, cf. v 20) reappear
in the body of the letter. The apostle had celebrated the generous character of the slave
owner‘s relationships with his fellow-Christians. Paul too had been encouraged by this love
and he now has a favor to ask. So he leads on to the request about Onesimus—the subject
which prompted the writing of the letter.

Comment
    4. eujcaristw` tw`/ qew`/ mou pavntote mneivan sou poiouvmeno" ejpi; tw`n proseucw`n
mou. ―I always thank my God when I mention you in my prayers.‖ Once again Paul begins
a letter by mentioning that he gives thanks to God for the recipient (see on Col 1:3), in this
case Philemon. Here, however, the singular eujcaristw` (―I give thanks‖) is used. Although
Timothy‘s name is joined with Paul‘s in the greeting, only the latter is the subject of this
principal verb. This is in contrast to the thanksgiving of the companion letter to the
Colossians where Timothy is linked with the apostle in the giving of thanks (Col 1:3;
though note the singular, referring to Paul alone, at Rom 1:8; 1 Cor 1:3; Phil 1:3; cf. Eph 1;
15, 16; 1 Tim 1:12; 2 Tim 1:3). Thanksgiving to God is uppermost in the apostle‘s mind as
be begins to pen this letter. He does not congratulate Philemon but addresses his word of
praise ―to my God‖ (tw`/ qew`/ mou). For Paul this is no vague or casual reference to whatever
gods there might be. It is to the one true God that he offers his thanksgiving and stressing
the consciousness of a personal relation to him he adds the pronoun ―my‖ (mou). This
phrase, with one exception, was used by the apostle in prayers or prayer reports (Rom 1:8;
possibly 1 Cor 1:4; Phil 1:3, 4:19 and Phlm 4. 2 Cor 12:21 is not in a prayer context) and he
has probably drawn from the wells of the Psalter for it (LXX Pss 3:8; 5:3; 7:2, 4, 7; 12:4;
17:3; 21:2, etc; see Lohse, 192. Harder, Paulus, 67, 68, notes that in the pagan world of
Paul‘s day it was the practice to increase the number of names and epithets in one‘s address
to the gods. This sprang from uncertainty and scepticism. But Paul, like the Psalter, showed
restraint using relatively few names—on occasion even Jews multiplied titles in their
address to God: so 2 Macc 1:23–29). The person thanked for Philemon‘s progress is the
God of the psalmists, known to Paul through Jesus Christ as ―Father.‖
―Always‖ (pavntote) is attached to the main verb but does not designate unceasing
thanksgiving (see on Col 1:3). Instead it is modified and explained by the phrase
immediately following, ―whenever I mention you in my prayers‖ (mneivan sou
poiouvmeno" ejpi; tw`n proseucw`n mou). When Paul states he gave thanks ―continually‖ he
means that he did not forget Philemon in his regular prayers—prayers which were centered
in petitions though other types were no doubt included.
     5. ajkouvwn sou th;n ajgavphn ktl. ―Because I hear of your love ….‖ Paul‘s second
participial clause is a causal one giving the ground or basis for his thanks to God. He has
received a good report about Philemon‘s conduct and this news causes him to give thanks
to God. (C. Spicq, Agape in the New Testament Vol. 2 Tr M. A. McNamara and M. H.
Richter. [St. Louis: Herder, 1965] 303, notes that the present participle ajkouvwn, ―hearing,‖
expresses continuity and duration: ―It suggests that St. Paul had received up-to-date
information about Philemon from more than one source, or even that he was getting regular
reports about him‖; the use of this verb ajkouvw, ―hear,‖ does not mean that Philemon was
unknown to Paul as Dibelius-Greeven, 103, implies and Knox, Philemon, 45, asserts.)
Information probably came from Epaphras (Col 1:7, 8; 4:12), and possibly from Onesimus,
about Philemon‘s good standing in the Christian faith.
     The apostle heard about Philemon‘s ―love‖ (ajgavph) and ―faith‖ (pivsti"). But how are
these words to be interpreted, and what are the respective objects of these two Christian
graces? Commentators have been divided, giving answers along the following lines:
     (1) pivsti" is taken to mean ―faithfulness‖ or ―reliability‖ (cf. 3 John 5), so that both
―love‖ and ―faithfulness‖ are directed toward both the Lord Jesus and all God‘s people.
Accordingly the NEB translates: ―for I hear of your love and faith towards the Lord Jesus
and towards all God‘s people‖ (see also Schlatter, 312, Vincent, 178, and Bruce, Paul,
393).
(2) Some take ―love‖ and ―faith‖ as being intimately linked (and render them as ―piety‖ or
―godliness‖) in an attitude which is shown to the Lord on the one hand and God‘s people on
the other (Dibelius-Greeven, 103, Kramer, Christ, 47; cf. Spicq, Agape 2, 303, 304, and
Carson, 105, 106, who are followed by K. Sullivan, ―Epignosis in the Epistles of St. Paul,‖
Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus Internationalis Catholicus. Vol. 2 [Rome: Pontifical
Biblical Institute, 1963] 409). Advocates of this interpretation point out that love toward the
Lord Jesus is closely linked with faith, because it is from faith that love grows and by faith
love is nourished. Also the love which is shown to the brethren is love in the context of
faith. The change of preposition from prov" (―to‖) to eij" (―to‖) is then said to stress a
difference in the relationships: to the Lord as object on the one hand, and to
fellow-believers in a like relationship on the other (however, among advocates of this view
there is no general agreement about the significance of the distinction, and in our judgment
it is better to regard the change as simply a stylistic variation).
     (3) A third interpretation sees in verse 5 an example of chiasmus, an a b b a pattern, in
which Philemon‘s love is directed toward all God‘s people and his faith is in the Lord Jesus
(among grammarians this is favored by BDF, para. 477[2], and Robertson, Grammar, 1200;
commentators such as Lightfoot, 332, 333, Lohmeyer, 177, apparently Moule, 141,
Friedrich, 192, Müller, 176, Lohse, 193, and Stuhlmacher, 32, 33, also follow this line; cf.
Stauffer, TDNT 1, 50, Greeven, Gebet, 177, Buhmann, TDNT 6, 212, and J. Jeremias,
―Chiasmus in den Paulusbriefen,‖ ZNW 49 [1958] 146). There are good reasons for taking
the verse in this way: first, chiasmus is common enough in the NT (Jeremias, ZNW 49 [1958]
146, sees Semitic influences at work, cf. Ps 1:6). Second, here the usual order of graces for
which the apostle gave thanks is reversed. Paul normally placed ―faith‖ before ―love.‖ This
reversal can be explained in terms of the situation which called forth the letter (although
there is some textual support [D 69 1739 pesh.] for placing pivsti", ―faith,‖ before ajgavph,
―love,‖ this change of early scribes was made in the interests of uniformity, cf. Lohmeyer,
177). At the time of writing the apostle‘s attention was focused on Philemon‘s love. The
word (i.e. ajgavph) appears again in verses 7 and 9, and Paul‘s request in connection with
Onesimus is made on the basis of that Christian love. Paul was setting down his thoughts in
the sequence in which they occurred to him. Having mentioned Philemon‘s love he refers
to his faith. This leads on to the sphere of the faith (h}n e]cei", ―which you have,‖
emphasizes that the faith is shown by one who is in the Lord jesus) which in turn directs
one‘s thoughts to the range and comprehensiveness of the love, i.e. it has been shown in the
past to all God‘s people. Finally, this interpretation is consistent with the introductory
thanksgiving of the companion letter to the Colossian Christians: ―because we have heard
of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love which you show to all God‘s people‖ (1:4). The
variation in order can be adequately accounted for along the lines suggested, while the
change in prepositions, from prov" to eij" (each means ―to‖) is to be seen as stylistic (cf.
Moule, Idiom Book, 68, Turner, Syntax, 256, and Lohse, 193).
6. Paul‘s thanksgiving leads directly on to his petition—an intercession concerning
Philemon‘s generosity. Although this verse contains no finite verb of petitionary prayer the
o{pw" (―that‖) clause which states the content of the intercession (o{pw", ―that,‖ is a stylistic
equivalent of i{na, ―that,‖ which also begins the clause specifying the content of Paul‘s
intercession at Eph 1:17; Phil 1:9; Col 1:9 [see 20]; 2 Thess 1:11; cf. eij" tov, ―that,‖ at 1
Thess 3:10) is dependent on mneivan sou poiouvmeno", the meaning of which is not
something general such as ―when I remember you,‖ but is ―when I make mention of you,‖
i.e. ―when I intercede for you‖ (this phrase and its syntactical equivalents proseucovmenoi,
―praying,‖ Col 1:3, and dehvsin poiouvmeno", ―making request,‖ Phil 1:4, occur in each of
those thanksgiving paragraphs where intercessory prayer is mentioned, i.e. Schubert‘s type
Ia and mixed types but not in the paragraphs that speak of thanksgiving alone, e.g. 1 Cor
1:4–9; 2 Thess 2:13, 14: for a structural and exegetical examination see his Form, 12, 54,
55, Wiles, Prayers, 218–25, and O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings, 7, 8, 54, 55. Lohse‘s
failure to see this important structural point leads to his erroneous statement that v 6 does
not depend on ―when I remember‖ [mneivan poiouvmeno"], 193). However, this temporal
participial clause is itself dependent on the principal verb ―I give thanks‖ (eujcaristw`).
Grammatically and logically the intercessory prayer springs out of the prayer of
thanksgiving (so Wiles, Prayers, 218, comments: ―The intercessory prayer-report in this
letter is interwoven more closely than usual within the thanksgiving period, both through
syntax and through content‖). It is as if Paul could not give thanks for the love and faith of
his colleague Philemon without making intercession for him.
     But the exact meaning of verse 6 is difficult to determine (for a recent discussion see G.
Panikulam,          
[AnBib 85 Rome: Biblical Institute, 1979] 86–90). This is because there are several
exegetical issues within the brief intercessory prayer: first, what is the meaning of hJ
koinwniva th`" pivstewv" sou? The following are some of the suggestions that have been
made: (a) ―the kindly deeds of charity which spring from your faith‖ (Lightfoot, 333, taking
koinwniva as especially referring to ―contributions,‖ ―almsgiving‖); (b) ―the communication
(to others) of your faith‖ (Vincent, 179); (c) ―your fellowship with other Christians created
by faith‖ (Lohmeyer, 178, who considers pivstew", ―of faith,‖ is a genitive of origin; cf. E.
W. Koch, ―A Cameo of Koinonia. The Letter to Philemon,‖ Int 17 [1963] 184); (d)
―communion (with Christ) by faith‖—i.e. faith-communion with Christ (Dibelius-Greeven,
103, H. Seesemann, Der Begriff KOINWNIA im Neuen Testament [BZNW 14 Giessen:
Töpelmann, 1933] 79–83, Hauck, TDNT 3, 805, Lohse, 193, 194, Stuhlmacher, 33, Jang,
Philemonbrief, 27, 28, and Gayer, Stellung, 249); (e) ―the faith in which you participate,‖
i.e. your share in the faith; and (f) ―the participation of other Christians in your faith‖ (J. Y.
Campbell, Three New Testament Studies [Leiden: Brill, 1965] 18). Second, how is eij"
Cristovn (lit. ―to Christ‖) to be understood? Third, is it to be connected with ejnerghv"
(―effective‖), with panto;" ajgaqou` (―every good thing‖) or with ejn ejpignwvsei (―with
knowledge‖)? Finally, how is ejn ejpignwvsei (―with knowledge‖) to be interpreted, and
who is to attain to the knowledge in question—Philemon himself or those who notice and
profit from his ―fellowship of faith‖?
Moule (142, 143), having outlined some of the difficulties of the verse and the attempts
made at its solution, concluded with a touch of humor: ―Unless and until further ejpivgnwsi"
[knowledge] is given to Christian interpreters, the answers to these questions must remain
obscure‖ (because of the difficulties A. R. George, Communion with God in the New
Testament [London: Epworth, 1953] 183, does not commit himself to any alternative).
Therefore the following suggestions are tentative: koinwniva is understood in an active
sense, not simply of almsgiving, although this is obviously covered, but in a wider sense
referring to ―generosity‖ or ―liberality‖ (in our judgment koinwniva at Phil 1:5 means the
same thing: see the discussion in my Introductory Thanksgivings, 23–25; Wiles, Prayers,
223, adds the further point that koinwniva, ―generosity,‖ prefigures the business language of
v 17, see below 298, 299). th`" pinstew" is treated as a genitive of origin indicating the
source from which the kindness comes: ―I pray that your generosity which springs from
your faith (i.e. in the Lord Jesus) …‖ pivsti" (―faith‖) has the same meaning as in verse 5,
although the phrase in verse 6 throws the emphasis on the practical expression of the faith
rather than on the faith itself or its object.According to this view ejnerghv" is to be
understood as ―effective‖ rather than ―active,‖ for the liberality of Philemon, according to
Paul‘s statements in verses 5 and 7, had already been ―active.‖ The intercessory request of
the apostle was that Philemon‘s liberality (and not that of others) might lead him effectively
(that is, Paul wished Philemon‘s liberality to be especially effective in the case of
Onesimus; on the nature of Paul‘s request see on v 17) into a deeper understanding (ejn
ehpignwvsei: ejn marks the sphere in which something takes place, cf. 2 Cor 1:6; Col 1:29;
note Vincent, 180) of all the blessings that belonged to him in Christ (ejnergh;" gevnhtai,
lit. ―may become effective,‖ is to be taken with ejn ejnpignwvsei panto;" ajgaqou`, lit. ―in a
knowledge of every good thing‖). pa`n ajgaqovn is understood to refer to ―every blessing‖
which belongs to Philemon as a Christian (Lohmeyer, 179, maintained that this expression
is a frequent designation for the will of God: so in Paul at Rom 2:10; 5:7; 7:13, 19; 9:11;
12:2, 9, 21; 13:3; 14:16; 15:2; Gal 6:10; 1 Thess 5:15. He drew a parallel between the
function of the law for a Jew and the place of faith here for the Christian. Both are to be
―active‖ in the believer, so that he may find out and do God‘s will [pa`n ajgaqovn]; however,
it is doubtful whether many of Lohmeyer‘s references are to the will of God at all; also his
case stands too heavily on a particular interpretation of eij" Cristovn [―into Christ‖] which
is questionable; see Moule, 143). In the present context ejpignwsi" conveys both the ideas
of understanding and experience. The apostle‘s prayer was not simply that Philemon might
understand or appreciate the treasures that belonged to him, but that he might also
experience them. It is necessary to use twoEnglish words to translate this one Greek word,
and therefore we render it by ―understanding and experience‖ (cf. Bruce‘srendering, ―the
experience and appreciation of everyblessing,‖ Paul, 393).
     These Christian blessings of which the apostle has spoken do not belong to Philemon
alone. They are for all who are incorporated ―into Christ‖ (eij" Cristovn) and include Paul
himself. There is considerable difference of opinion as to the meaning of this phrase.
Lohmeyer (179), Wickert (ZNW 52 [1961] 230) and Suhl (Kairos 15 [1973] 271) treat it as
an eschatological thrust in the passage, the latter two maintaining it has special reference to
Christ as the final Judge. Others such as Moule (142, 143) consider the phrase means
―bringing us into (closer) relation to Christ,‖ while Lightfoot understands the expression as
having reference to Christ as the goal (he considers the words ought to be connected with
the main statement of the sentence, ejnergh;" gevntai ktl. and paraphrases the whole: ―as
thou attainest to the perfect knowledge of every good thing bestowed upon us by God,
looking unto and striving after Christ,‖ 332, 334). Lohse renders the words as ―for the glory
of Christ‖; their purpose is ―to emphasize in conclusion that all active working of the
faith—a faith which acts according to the knowledge of the good which God has bestowed
on us—should be for the glory of Christ‖ (194, 195; cf. Vincent, 181, who regards the
expression as meaning ―unto Christ‘s glory,‖ i.e. the advancement of his cause).
     According to our suggestion the phrase eij" Cristovn refers to incorporation and is
almost equivalent to ejn Cristw`/ (―in Christ‖; it is perhaps not without significance that
where the person of Jesus is referred to in v 5 Kuvrion ÆIhsou`n, ―Lord Jesus,‖ is used while
the corporate reference in v 6 is to eij" Cristovn, ―in Christ,‖ which is how Kramer, Christ,
140, translates it; cf. also Percy, Probleme, 125). One can understand why Paul employed
this expression, for in the o{pw" (―that‖) clause of verse 6 he had already used the
preposition ejn (―in‖) twice before penning the phrase in question. ejn Cristw`/ (―in Christ‖)
following hard upon ejn hJmi`n (―in us,‖ ―among us‖) would sound harsh. So the synonymous
phrase eij" Cristovn (―in[to] Christ‖) has been chosen. Paul‘s intercessory prayer may thus
be paraphrased: ―I pray that your generosity, which arises from your faith, may lead you
effectively into a deeper understanding and experience of every blessing which belongs to
us as fellow-members in the body of Christ.‖
7. The apostle no longer reports his intercessory prayer which was offered to God but uses
the language of direct address (―brother,‖ ajdelfev) as he tells Philemon why he had been
refreshed and comforted. This verse which refers once more to the love that Philemon has
shown toward the saints is a smooth and effective transition from the thanksgiving
paragraph to the main purpose of the letter, a purpose which Paul promptly sets forth in
verse 8. In this simple transition important ideas from both the thanksgiving and the body
of the letter are mentioned (or anticipated), e.g. ―love‖ (vv 5, 9), ―comfort‖ (cf. vv 9, 10),
―heart‖ (vv 12, 20), ―saints‖ (v 5), ―refreshed‖ (v 20), and ―brother‖ (v 20).
     cara;n ga;r pollh;n e[scon kai; paravklhsiv ejpi; th`/ ajgavph/ sou. ―For I have derived
much joy and comfort from your love.‖ ―For‖ (gavr) gives the ground for Paul‘s
thanksgiving (vv 4, 5) as he mentions again Philemon‘s love (cf. v 5) concretely
demonstrated to the Colossian Christians. The apostle identifies himself with these
fellow-believers, even with those he had not previously met (cf. Col 2:2), for he states that
―joy and comfort‖ given to them is also given to him (Rom 12:9–13; 2 Cor 11:29; Caird,
220; Philemon‘s deeds of love have been a rich source of [ejpiv with the dative means ―on
account of,‖ ―from,‖ see BAG, 287] joy and comfort to Paul, cf. Lohse, 195). He had written
to the Corinthians in a similar vein at the joy (2 Cor 7:4) and comfort (7:7) he had
experienced (cf. 7:13) in the context of his pastoral cares for this difficult congregation (on
carav ―joy,‖ bound up with his work as an apostle see Conzelmann, TDNT 9, 369, 370; on
paravklhsi", ―comfort,‖ note Schmitz, TDNT 5, 793–99).
o{ti ta; splavgcna tw`n aJgivwn ajnapevpautai dia; sou`, ajdelfev. ―Because the hearts of the
saints have been refreshed by you, brother.‖ These words elucidate or explain (o{ti,
―because‖) more particularly the expression ―on account of your love‖ (Abbott, 181, and
von Soden, 74). Some commentators (e.g. Ernst, 131) suggest that here Paul calls to mind
the general distinguishing marks of Philemon‘s behavior as the presupposition for making
his request. Others, however, consider he has in mind some particular instance of the
kindness for which Philemon was distinguished. So Caird (220) says the perfect tense of
―refreshed‖ (ajnapevpautai) seems to ―point to some conspicuous act of generosity rather
than to continual kindness‖ (see also Lohse, 195, and Scott, 105, who conjecture that the
occasion for this may have been the earthquake of A.D. 60). But although this statement
may indicate Paul has learned of one particular deed by which Philemon has helped the
congregation we cannot be sure (the perfect tense may denote Philemon‘s regular acts by
which the believers were refreshed, or the lasting effects of a signal instance). Either way
the apostle does not detail Philemon‘s deed(s) of love. He simply spells out the effects: ―the
hearts of the saints have been refreshed.‖ The expression ta; splavgcna, which frequently
designates ―pity,‖ ―sympathy‖ or ―tender mercies,‖ that is, an affection directed toward
others (a meaning it carries at Col 3:12, see 198, 199), in its three occurrences within the
letter to Philemon (cf. vv 12, 20) evidently means ―inmost feelings,‖ ―very self‖ (so Moule,
144).It designates ―the total personality at the deepest level. It … remains a very strong and
forceful term which occurs only when Paul is speaking directly and personally … [it] is …
used for the whole person which in the depths of its emotional life has experienced
refreshment through consolation and love‖ (Köster, TDNT 7, 555). And the frequent
occurrence of the term in this short letter shows the apostle‘s deep personal interest in the
matter. Because Philemon had refreshed the hearts of other Christians, the apostle is
confident he will not refuse his request in connection with Onesimus, described as ―my
heart‖ (ta; ejma; spla;gcna): so he encourages Philemon, ―refresh my heart in Christ‖
(ajnavpausovn mou ta; splavgcna ejn Cristw`/, v 20). ajnapauvw (to ―cause to rest,‖ ―give
[someone] rest,‖ ―refresh‖; in the passive of Titus‘ spirit being set at rest, 2 Cor 7:13; see
BAG, 58, 59, Bauernfeind, TDNT 1, 350, and Hensel and Brown, NIDNTT 3, 254–58) was
used (a) of taking one‘s rest, that is, in a normal bodily sense (Mark 14:41; Matt 26:45; in
Attic Greek prose it was almost a technical expression for the resting of soldiers); or (b) of
calming someone who has become disturbed, or refreshing by giving pleasure, comfort or
compensation (1 Cor 16:18; Phlm 7, 20). This might occur through Christian love,
fellowship or action, or by means of news about these (see Hensel and Brown, NIDNTT 3,
256). Although the term frequently spoke of a temporary relief (so Lightfoot, 334,
absolutely, but note Vincent‘s qualifications, 181) therefreshment promised by Christ to the
weary (Matt 11:28, 29) was not temporary, and the word was also used of the rest of the
blessed dead (Rev 14:13).

Explanation
    Although the epistle to Philemon is the briefest of all his letters Paul begins it in his
customary way by reporting his thanksgiving to God for the love and faith of his reader.
With slight variations the usual form of the thanksgiving paragraph has been followed here.
Verses 4 to 7 are designed to prepare the way for the specific matter with which the letter is
primarily concerned, namely, the request concerning Onesimus. The general emphasis of
the passage, its tone and the specific terms which anticipate later references, serve this
function of preparing for the central issue of the letter.
    Giving thanks to God is uppermost in Paul‘s mind as he begins the passage. He has
received good reports about Philemon‘s love actively demonstrated to all God‘s people, a
love that arose out of his faith in the Lord Jesus. Paul‘s thanksgiving leads directly on to his
petition—an intercession concerning Philemon‘s generosity. It is that his friend‘s liberality
might lead him effectively into a deeper understanding of all the blessings that belong to
him in Christ. These Christian blessings do not belong to Philemon alone. They are for all
who are incorporated ―into Christ‖ and include Paul himself.
At verse 7 he no longer reports his intercessory prayer which was offered to God but uses
the language of direct address as he tells Philemon why he had been refreshed and
comforted. The latter‘s love had been concretely shown to the Colossian Christians, and
Paul can identify with these fellow-believers (some of whom he had not met; cf. Col 2:2)
for he states that ―joy and comfort‖ given to them is also received by him.




Paul’s Plea for Onesimus (8–20)
Bibliography
Bjerkelund, C. J. Parakaô, 118–24. Bruce, F. F. Paul, 393–406. Gayer, R. Stellung, 223–66.
Goodenough, E. R. HTR 22 (1929) 181–83. Greeven, H. TLZ 79 (1954) 373–78. Knox, J.
Philemon. Merk, O. Handeln, 225–29. Schütz, J. H. Paul, 221–24. Schweizer, E. ―Zum
Sklavenproblem im Neuen Testament.‖ EvT 32 (1972) 502–506. Suhl, A. Kairos 15 (1973) 272–74.
Westermann, W. L. The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity. Philadelphia: American
Philosophical Society, 1955, 102–109. Wickert, U. ZNW 52 (1961) 230–38. Zmijewski, J. BibLeb
15 (1974) 277–94.

Translation
       8
         Therefore, although I am bold enough in Christ to command you to do what is
   fitting, 9yet for love‘s sake I prefer to appeal to you. Although I am none other than
   Paul, an ambassador of Christ Jesus and now also his prisoner, 10I appeal to you for
     my child Onesimus, whom I begot while in prison, 11Previously he was useless to you,
     but now he has become useful both to you and to me. 12I am sending hima—who is my
     very heart—back to you. 13Indeed I would have liked to keep him with me so that he
     could take your place in helping me during my imprisonment for the gospel. 14But I
     would not do anything without your consent, so that any favor you do will be
     spontaneous and not forced. 15Perhaps for this reason he was separated from you for a
     little while so that you might have him back forever, 16no longer as a slave, but as one
     who is much more than a slave, as a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much
     more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
17
   So then, if you consider me your partner, welcome him as you would me. 18If he has
wronged you or owes you anything, charge that to my account. 19I Paul am writing this
with my own hand. I will pay it—not to mention that you owe me your very self besides.
20
  Yes, brother, I do wish that I may have some benefit from you in the Lord; refresh my
heart in Christ.

Note
a. Although the general sense of the verse is clear the manuscript tradition has no uniform
reading. That of a
*
  A 33 best explains the origin of the other readings. proslabou` (―receive,‖ from v 17) was
introduced by copyists to smooth out the syntax, as also was the addition of su (―you‖). See
Metzger, Textual Commentary, 655, 656, and Lohse, 201; see below on the apparently
redundant aujtovn (―him‖).

Form/Structure/Setting
    With the opening words of verse 8, ―Therefore …‖ (diov …), Paul commences the body
of his letter to Philemon, the intercession for Onesimus, and this is a carefully structured
paragraph extending from verses 8 to 20. Paul intercedes for Philemon‘s runaway slave,
Onesimus, addressing Philemon in terms of Christian love and faith. He weighs his words
carefully and structures the main part of the letter so that the addressee is gradually led to
the actual request (Lohse, 197, 198).
First, Paul gives a brief description of his situation (vv 8–12). The opening sentence begins
with the conjunction diov (―therefore‖) and a concessive participial clause pollh;n ejn
Cristw`/ parrhsivan e[cwn ejpitavssein soi … (―although I am bold enough in Christ to
command you …‖). The principal clause which immediately follows, dia; th;n ajgavphn
ma`llon parakalw` (―yet for love‘s sake I prefer to appeal to you‖), stands in an
adversative relation to the preceding (ma`llon, ―yet,‖ ―rather‖). A second participial clause
toiou`to" w[n … (which may be paraphrased as ―although I am the sort of person …‖),
dependent on the main clause, names the subject Pau`lo" (―Paul‖) and characterizes him as
a presbuvth" (―ambassador‖) who is now also a devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou` (―a prisoner of
Christ Jesus‖). Behind Paul‘s request stands one who is both an ambassador and a slave of
Christ Jesus. In verse 10 the same finite verb parakalw` (―I appeal‖) is repeated as Paul
makes his request of the addressee (se, ―you‖). Before he mentions the name of the
runaway slave, he speaks of him as his child whom he has begotten in prison (v 10) and this
stresses how dear and beloved he is to him. Just as Paul has previously (v 9) described
himself by means of a contrasting statement, so here too in verse 11 he makes an
antithetical assertion about Onesimus, playing on the words a[crhston—eu{crhston
(―useless‖—―useful‖); tovn potev soi a[crhston nuni; de;»kai;¼ soi; kai; ejmoi; eu{crhston
(―Previously he was useless to you, but now he has become useful both to you and to me‖).
By means of the pronouns in the dative case (soiv, soiv, ejmoiv, ―you,‖ ―you,‖ and ―me‖) Paul
underscores the personal relationships between Onesimus and Philemon on the one hand,
and Onesimus and himself on the other. Verse 12 contains a relative clause o}n ajnevpemyav
soi (―whom I am sending back to you‖), while the noun clause attached to it aujtovn, toutV
e[stin ta; ejma; splavlcna (―him, who is my very heart‖) spells out the close
relationship—even identification—between Paul and the runaway slave.
    In the second section (vv 13, 14) Paul looks back to the time when Onesimus came to
him seeking refuge. Verse 13 commences with a relative pronoun o{n (―whom,‖ a further
reference to Onesimus), and contains a finite verb of wishing, ejboulovmhn (―I would have
liked‖) to which an infinitive is attached (katevcein, ―to retain‖). A purpose i[na clause is
dependent on the preceding. In verse 14 the construction is parallel though antithetical:
cwri;" de; th`" sh`" gnwvmh" (―but without your consent‖), which begins the clause, sets the
contrast with what has gone before. Again a finite verb of wishing is used, hjqevlhsa (―I
wanted,‖ an aorist instead of an imperfect, cf. ejboulovmhn, ―I would have liked‖), with an
infinitive attached (poih`sai, ―to do‖). Verse 14 also concludes with a purpose i{na clause
that is dependent on the preceding, and within this telic construction a sharp antithesis is
presented mh; wJ" kata; ajnavgkhn … ajlla; kata; ejkouvsion (―not from compulsion … but
from your own free will‖).
    Verses 15 and 16 (which Zmijewski, BibLeb 15 [1974] 289, regards as a unity) are
linked with the preceding by means of gavr (―for‖) as Paul spells out an additional reason
for his not detaining Onesimus. The sentence contains a sharp contrast between pro;" w{ran
(―for a little while‖) of the principal clause and the aijwvnion (―for ever‖) of the subordinate
i{na clause, a contrast which finds its correspondence in the two verbs of these clauses,
cwrivzw (to ―separate‖) and ajpevcw (to ―have back‖). God‘s activity is implied in the
passive ejcwrivsqh (―he was separated from‖) and therefore the purpose i{na clause which
follows signifies the divine intention. Verse 16 contains a long addition which relates back
to aujtovn (―him,‖ i.e. Onesimus), the object of the final verb ajpevch/" (―[that] you may have
him back‖) and here Onesimus is described. For the first time it is stated that he is a slave;
but this is immediately qualified by means of an antithesis: he is more than a slave (oujkevti
wJ" dou`lon ajlla; uJpe;r dou`lon). What this ―more‖ signifies is expressed in the following
appositional phrase which gives to him his Christian significance: he is ajdelfo;n
ajgaphtovn (―a beloved brother‖), and as such is referred to in the same way as Philemon
himself (vv 7, 20). The latter part of the verse seeks to bring before Philemon the
consequences of this, and a superlative formulation mavlista (here as an elative meaning
―especially‖) is still further accented by povsw/ de; ma`llon (lit. ―how much more‖). There is
thus a double comparison. Onesimus has been a beloved brother to Paul in the highest
sense. Even more will he be a beloved brother to Philemon, both as a slave and as one
bound to him ―in the Lord.‖ (On the structure of vv 15 and 16 note especially Zmijewski,
BibLeb 15 [1974] 289, 290.)
    Verses 17–20 conclude the body of the letter. After his carefully worded preliminaries
Paul for the first time states the content of his request of Philemon, proslabou` aujto;n wJ"
ejmev (―receive him as me,‖ v 17). The ou|n (―therefore‖) of verse 17 indicates a return to the
main theme of the letter. The opening sentence (v 17) contains an introductory conditional
clause, eij ou|n me e[cei" koinwnovn (―so then, if you consider me your partner‖) which is
then followed by a principal clause with its verb in the imperative mood, proslavbou`
aujto;n wJ" ejmev (―receive him as me‖). Verse 18 is exactly parallel: it also begins with an
introductory conditional clause, eij dev ti hjdivkhsevn se h] ojfeivlei (―if he has wronged you
or owes you anything‖) and it is followed by the principal clause with its verb an
imperative, tou`to ejmoi; ejllovga (―charge that to my account‖). The opening words of verse
19, ejgwJ Pau`lo" e{grafa th`/ ejmh`/ ceiriv, ejgwJ ajpoti;sw (―I Paul am writing this with my
own hand. I will pay it‖) are a parenthesis, a signed IOU, as the apostle undertakes to make
good any loss incurred by Onesimus. Verse 19b picks up the thought of verse 18, and by
means of an elliptical construction, i{na mh; levgw soi (―not to mention to you‖), Paul
reminds Philemon that he, the addressee, is indebted to the apostle. The words are chosen
carefully: prosofeivlei" (―you owe [besides]‖) corresponds to ojfeivlei (―[if] he owes,‖ v
18), while there is an interesting interplay of first and second person pronouns (v 18, se …
ejmoiv, ―you … to me‖; v 19, ejgwv … soi … seautovn moi, ―I … to you … yourself to me‖).
The final verse of the long paragraph which is made up of two sentences, verse 20a and
20b, echoes themes previously mentioned: ajdelfev (―brother‖), ajnavpauson … ta;
splavgcna (―refresh the heart‖). The personal relationships between sender and recipient,
Paul and Philemon, which stood in the foreground at the commencement of the body of the
letter, are again prominent. The two sentences, in which the apostle states his earnest wish
that Philemon might fulfill his heart‘s desire, close with parallel ejn phrases: ejn kurivw/ (―in
the Lord‖) and ejn Cristw`/ (―in Christ‖).

Comment
     At the conclusion of the introductory thanksgiving Paul begins the main part of his
letter to Philemon (vv 8–20), his intercession for Onesimus. In a carefully structured
paragraph (see the preceding section) Paul leads on to his actual request of Philemon.
8. The body of the letter commences with the particle ―therefore‖ (diov: see BAG, 198;
several consider that the links with the preceding are not particularly strong: so Lohmeyer,
183, Sanders, JBL 81 [1962] 355, Lohse, 198, Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 272, Stuhlmacher, 36,
and Gayer, Stellung, 250; however the linguistic and structural ties are considerable [see the
preceding section] while the reference to ―love‖ in v 9, the basis of Paul‘s request, is bound
up with the ground of his thanksgiving mentioned in v 5) as Paul by means of a concessive
clause (so Moule, 144, and his Idiom Book, 102, cf. Turner, Syntax, 157) makes an unusual
assertion: ―For this reason, although I am bold enough in Christ to command you to do
what is fitting (v 8), yet for love‘s sake I prefer to appeal to you …‖ (v 9) (diov, pollh;n ejn
Cristw`/ parrhsivan e{cwn ejpitavssein soi to; ajnh`kon ktl.). The term parrhsiva which
literally means ―all speech‖ was used originally in the sphere of politics to signify the
democratic right of a full citizen of a Greek city-state to speak out one‘s opinion freely.
Later it was found as a characteristic of the relations between true friends in opposition to
the feigned compliments of flatterers (see W. C. van Unnik, ―The Christian‘s Freedom of
Speech in the New Testament,‖ BJRL 44 [1962] 466–88, cf. BAG, 630, 631, Schlier, TDNT 5,
871–86, and Hahn, in NIDNTT 2, 734–37).Neither noun nor cognate verb parrhsiavzomai
(―speak freely, openly, fearlessly‖) appears frequently in the LXX (van Unnik, BJRL 44
[1962] 472, comments that the word-group is ―a marginal feature‖; for details see Schlier,
TDNT 5, 875–79, and Hahn, NIDNTT 2, 735, 736), but when we turn to the NT we note a
considerable increase of instances (the noun appears thirty-one times, the verb nine: the
former in the Pauline corpus at 2 Cor 3:12; 7:4; Eph 3:12; 6:19; Phil 1:20; Col 2:15, 1 Tim
3:13, Philem 8, and the latter at Eph 6:20; 1 Thess 2:2). No single English translation
renders these occurrences with equal success (e.g. the NEB gives a variety of translations:
―plainly,‖ ―bold,‖ ―boldness,‖ ―publicly,‖ ―openly,‖ ―confidence,‖ while van Unnik opts for
the phrase ―freedom of speech‖). The term in Paul can designate his openness and
frankness toward men (2 Cor 3:12; 7:4; Eph 6:20; 1 Thess 2:2; 1 Tim 3:13; Phlm 8; cf. BAG,
630, Schlier, TDNT 5, 883, and Lohse, 198), a candor which is based on his openness
toward God (2 Cor 3:12; Eph 3:12; Phil 1:20). Acts again and again reports how fearlessly
Peter, Paul and others stood before the Jews or Gentiles and proclaimed the works of God
(cf. Acts 2:29; 4:13, 29, 31; 28:31 for the noun, and 9:27, 28;13:46; 14:3; 18:26; 19:8;
26:26). This boldness which provoked astonishment (4:13), division (14:3, 4) and
persecution (9:27) is a fruit of the Spirit which is to be soughtrepeatedly (4:29–31). On
occasion parrhsiva in Paul can denote ―frankness‖: at 2 Corinthians 7:4 the NEB rendering
―I am perfectly frank with you‖ (pollhv moiparrhsiva pro;" uJma`") catches the nuance. In
the strained relations which existed between Paul and the Christians in Corinth Paul finds
the freedom to speak to them in all frankness and urges the Corinthians not to close their
hearts (so van Unnik, BJRL 44 [1962] 473, 474). Connected with this, parrhsiva can
indicate that the relationship to other men is characterized by ―openness‖ in the sense of
affection.This is precisely what Paul means in Philemon 8: it is great boldness or openness
(the pollhv, ―much,‖ indicates how much freedom Paul has) ―in Christ‖ (ejn Cristw`/), i.e.
because of their Christian relationships. No doubt Paul has in view their personal intimacy
(a point brought out in the Greek through the balancing of first and second person singulars
throughout the whole paragraph; see above) which probably began at the time of
Philemon‘s conversion when Paul was the instrument God used (v 19). Philemon‘s fine
Christian character, mentioned explicitly in the preceding verses, meant Paul could speak
openly and with affection, while his responsibility as apostle to the Gentiles, of which the
addressee was one, enabled him to speak boldly in Christ.
     Many commentators suggest that parrhsiva (―boldness,‖ ―openness‖) here is virtually
equivalent to ejxousiva (―authority,‖ so Schlier, TDNT 5, 883, who is cited with approval by
many, states: ―we have an instance of parrhoiva in much the same sense as ejxousiva; cf.
Lohse, 198, and note also Ernst, 133, and Merk, Handeln, 225, among others). Such an
identification, however, is incorrect. The note of authority is struck in ejpitavssein not in
parrhsiva. Certainly the term ejpitavssw (―order,‖ ―command‖; BAG, 302; on the
word-group see Delling, TDNT 8, 27–48) is a strong one. Although it does not appear
elsewhere in the Pauline corpus the cognate noun does: ejpitaghv (―command,‖ ―order,‖
―injunction‖) turns up seven times (Rom 16:26; 1 Cor 7:6, 25; 2 Cor 8:8; 1 Tim 1:1; Tit
1:3; 2:15), and it is clear from the contexts that it means an authoritative command from
one in a superior position (cf. Rom 16:26 which refers to an ejpitaghv ―command,‖ of the
eternal God). ejpitavssw (to ―command‖) is found in the NT for the authoritative orders of
Jesus to demons (Mark 1:27; 9:25 etc), as well as the commands of Herod (Mark 6:27) and
Ananias (Acts 23:2). As in the LXX the term is restricted to situations involving obedience
to an undisputed religious or political authority (Lohmeyer, 183; Schütz, Paul, 222; cf.
Delling, TDNT 8, 36, 37).
to; ajnh`kon denotes ―what is fitting‖ (see above on Col 3:18) and has to do with the matter
about which Paul writes to Philemon. It ―does not mean the generally valid moral
commandment‖ (so correctly Lohse, 198; against Schlier, TDNT 1, 360, who refers to ―that
which is almost legally obligatory,‖ and Schütz, Paul, 222, who states that the term
―presumes a binding authority, whether political or religious, to which one is obligated‖),
but what is proper for Philemon, as a Christian, to do in the circumstances concerning
Onesimus. At this point Paul does not spell out the content of that duty, but only indicates
he might have simply given a command about the matter.
     9. Paul does not intend to enforce compliance with his word; rather he bases his appeal
on other grounds: dia; th;n ajgavphn ma`llon parakalw` (―For love‘s sake I prefer to appeal
to you‖). The verb parakalw`, which had a wealth of meanings in the Greek world of
Paul‘s day (see above on 2:2, and note the range of translations in BAG, 617) and could
even connote ―admonish,‖ strikes the note of request or entreaty here (it is expressly
distinguished from ejpitavssw, ―command,‖ by means of the ma`llon, ―rather,‖ cf. Schmitz,
TDNT5, 795, and Bjerkelund, Parakalô, 188; Hainz‘s assertion, , 204, that ―Paul
commands even when he requests‖ is contradicted by the Greek antithetical construction
with its concessive clause in v 8 and the ma`llon, ―rather,‖ of v 9, and tells us more about
Hainz‘s own view of authority than Paul‘s). Bjerkelund (Parakalô, 119) notes that even a
king can request and Paul chooses here to entreat rather than to command. He wants
Philemon to consent freely (see v 14).
―For love‘s sake‖ (dia; th;n ajgavphn) has been taken to mean love as such, that is, love as a
principle, which governs Christians in their dealings and relations with each other, and
which is regarded as the ground of Paul‘s appeal (so Wickert, ZNW 52 [1961] 236, ―The
common love urges that the request be made,‖ cited by Lohse, 199; an alternative
suggestion is to understand the love as Paul‘s, either for his child Onesimus or for
Philemon). But the term ―love‖ (ajgavph) has already been used twice in the previous
paragraph (vv 5, 7) to denote Philemon‘s love concretely shown to the saints, and the most
natural way of interpreting the expression here in verse 9 is along similar lines, so
understanding the definite article ―the‖ (thvn, in dia; th;n ajgavphn, ―for love‘s sake‖) as the
article of renewed mention, pointing to the love previously referred to. (There would have
to be strong contextual reasons for interpreting the term in a sense other than these two
previous instances and, in our judgment, the context does not demand such a change in
connotation; in fact, quite the reverse). It is precisely because Paul knows of Philemon‘s
kindness and generosity in the past that he is able to entreat rather than command, and he
looks forward to Philemon‘s love being shown once again, this time with reference to
Onesimus (our exegesis of v 6 above synchronizes with this interpretation; it has already
been shown that this letter has been carefully constructed, with the introductory
thanksgiving paragraph anticipating themes in the body of the letter: ajgavph, ―love,‖ is the
first of those themes to be taken up; O‘Brien, Introductory Thanksgivings, 51, see also
Dibelius-Greeven, 104, ―trusting in the love of Philemon mentioned in 7, ‖ Friedrich, 191,
Knox, Philemon, 19, Zmijewski, BibLeb 15 [1974] 278, and Gayer, Stellung, 251).

    toiou`to" w}n wJ" Pau`lo" presbuvth", nuni; de; kai; devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou`
―Although I am none other than Paul, an ambassador of Christ Jesus and now also his
prisoner.‖ In the second part of the sentence (a participial clause toiou`to" w[n …, ―since or
though I am the sort of person ….‖ dependent on the principal clause) Paul describes
himself as the one who makes the appeal (appositional expressions, usually for the sake of
emphasis or special effect, occur at vv 9, 10, 11, 12, 16 and 19; note also the occurrences of
wJ", ―as,‖ at vv 9, 14, 16 and 17—here the particle ―introduces the characteristic quality of a
pers., thing or action, etc, referred to in the context,‖ BAG, 898, cf. Lohse, 199, and when it
follows toiou`to" it equals ―in my character as,‖ BAG, 821): first, he mentions his own
name, ―Paul‖ (Pau`lo" occurs in the central sections of his letters at v 19, 2 Cor 10:1; Gal
5:2; Eph 3:1; Col 1:23; 1 Thess 2:18). The request of Philemon comes from one
well-known to him—Paul. Second, he calls himself presbuvth", which some have taken as
a reference to his age, and rendered ―old man‖ (so BAG, 700, who discusses the stages of
life through which one passes; Bornkamn, TDNT 6, 683, Lohse, 199, Stuhlmacher, 37, 38,
and earlier commentators such as von Soden, 75, Vincent, 184, Dibelius-Greeven, 104,
105, and Friedrich, 193).Accordingly, Paul who thinks it enough to appeal to the love of
Philemon, reinforces this with a reference to his age, his bonds, and the fact that he is a
spiritual father to Onesimus. But the word presbuvth" was also used on occasion of an
―envoy,‖ or ―ambassador‖ (2 Macc 11:34; 2 Chr 32:31 [B]; 1 Macc 14:22; 15:17 [a

    ], so Bornkamm, TDNT 6, 683, for references; strictly the Greek word for ―ambassador‖
was presbeuthv", but Lightfoot, 336, 337, and Lohmeyer, 185, have shown that for some
considerable period presbuvth" was used for both; either rendering is possible and so the
context must determine the meaning here). If the translation ―ambassador‖ is accepted, it
would point to the authority granted to Paul, and so underline the fact that he speaks as an
ambassador of Christ (cf. 2 Cor 5:20 and Eph 6:20, ―for which [gospel] I am an ambassador
[presbeu`w] in chains‖). On this view the participle (w[n) is concessive and parallel to the
concessive clause of verse 8. It can thus be rendered: ―although I am none other than Paul,
an ambassador of Christ Jesus, and now also his prisoner‖ (cf. Moule, 144: others who
understand presbuvth" here in the sense of presbeuthv", ―ambassador,‖ are Haupt, 201,
202, Robertson, Grammar, 201, T. Preiss, Life in Christ. Tr H. Knight SBT 13 [London:
SCM, 1954] 37, 38, Kümmel, Introduction, 349, Schmauch, Beiheft, 96, Wickert,ZNW 52
[1961] 235, Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 272, Martin, NCB, 163, Ernst, 133, 134, Caird, 221,
Bruce, Paul, 393, Gayer, Stellung, 251, and Ollrog, Paulus, 102).
    Finally, Paul is ―a prisoner of Christ Jesus‖ (devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou`, see on v 1), that
is, he shares in Christ‘s sufferings right now (nuniv is a more emphatic adverb than nu`n,
―now,‖ and might suggest that Paul‘s imprisonment had only just begun at the time he
wrote: see the Introduction above) as one faithful to his calling. Philemon will thus heed his
words.
10. parakalw` se peri; tou` ejmou` tevknou, oÔn ejgejnnhsa ejn toi`" devsmoi" ÆOnhvsimon.
―I appeal to you for my child whom I begot while in prison—Onesimus.‖ The verb ―I
beseech, appeal‖ is repeated (parakalw`) as Paul specifically mentions his request and
therefore his purpose in writing the letter. Philemon is the person addressed (se, ―you,‖ is
the direct object of the verb), and Paul‘s request is not for himself but is an intercession for
the one converted through his ministry while in prison and who is very dear to
him—Onesimus. The Greek preposition periv here means ―for,‖ ―on behalf of‖ (see 1 Cor
16:12; 2 Cor 12:8 and 2 Thess 2:1) rather than ―about,‖ ―with reference to‖ (as Knox,
Philemon, 20, has argued; for a critique see Greeven, TLZ 79 [1954] 373–78, esp. 374,
Bjerkelund, Parakalô, 120, 121, Lohse, 199, and Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 272). Paul is
interceding on Onesimus‘ behalf rather than making a request about him. The sentence is
carefully constructed, for Onesimus‘ name stands last. This was probably the first news
Philemon had received of his slave since he ran away and he might be expected to react
negatively to the mention of his name. So with delicate tact Paul first establishes the central
fact that Onesimus has become a Christian, converted during Paul‘s imprisonment.
    In describing Onesimus as his child whom he had begotten (peri; tou` ejmou` tevknou
oÔn ejgevnnhsa) Paul was using the imagery of spiritual parenthood which he employed
elsewhere and which had its counterpart in Judaism, ultimately deriving from the O T. So he
calls himself the father of an entire Christian community, the Corinthians whom he had
begotten ―in Christ Jesus through the gospel‖ (1 Cor 4:15; cf. Gal 4:19), while Timothy (1
Cor 4:17; 2 Tim 1:2) and Titus (Titus 1:4) he describes as his children (tevknon occurs in
each reference; cf. Rengstorf, TDNT 1, 668, and Schrenk, TDNT 5, 1005). In 1 Peter 1:3 God
himself is spoken of as begetting Christians (cf. 1 Pet 2:2) and in James 1:18 of giving birth
to them. The terms ―father‖ and ―son‖ with reference to a master and his disciple appear as
early as 2 Kings 2:12 (of Elijah and Elisha respectively) while at the time of Jesus it was
customary for a rabbi to call his pupil ―my son.‖ In this there was no thought of begetting
but the notion is present in the statement of the Babylonian Talmud: ―When a man teaches
the son of another the Torah, the Scripture treats him as if he had begotten him‖ (bSanh .
99b; cf. Str-B 3, 340, 341, for further rabbinic examples, note also Büchsel, TDNT 1, 665,
666). In addition, it was believed that the Jew who wins another to his faith (and this was
an achievement of great magnitude, being compared with the creative work of God himself)
satisfies in an ideal manner the injunction to be fruitful and multiply, which according to
the rabbis was laid on all male Jews as a supreme command (see Rengstorf, TDNT 1, 666,
667). In the mystery religions although the terminology was somewhat similar (the
mystagogue was regarded as the father of the initiate, cf. Dibelius-Greeven, 105) the ideas
were different. Paul‘s act of begetting and his fatherhood were ―through the gospel‖ (1 Cor
4:15).
That Onesimus (the Greek ÆOnhvsimon tovn potev ktl. is an accusative case, not a genitive
in agreement with tou` ejmou` tevknou, ―my child,‖ and this may be due to an attraction to
the relative sentence oÔn ejgevnnhsa ktl. [―whom I have begotten,‖ etc]: so Moule, 145,
and Lohse, 200; Knox, Philemon, 21, takes it to mean that ―Onesimus‖ was now first given
to him as his ―Christian‖ name) had been converted by Paul during the latter‘s
imprisonment (which was no doubt a frustrating time) probably made him feel a special
affection for Onesimus. The further point needs to be noted: if Onesimus was Paul‘s son,
then that made him Philemon‘s brother. Paul will make this explicit a little later, but even
now the implication is clear.
    11. Several further statements about Onesimus are added (vv 11, 12). First, by means of
a pun on the words a[crhston/eu[crhston (―useless‖/―useful‖) a sharp contrast is drawn
between what Onesimus had once (potej) been and what he had now (nuni; dev) become in
Christ: tovn potev soi a[crhston nuni; de; »kai;¼ soi; kai; ejmoi; eu[crhston (―Previously he
was useless to you, but now he has become useful [both] to you and to me‖; within this
clause there are two antitheses: potev … nuni; dev [―once … but now‖] and a[crhston …
eu[crhston [―useless … useful‖], as well as a parallel expression »kai;¼ soi; kai; ejmoiv
[―[both] to you and to me‖]). Commentators have drawn attention to the many extrabiblical
instances of the play on the ―useless/useful‖ contrast (Plato, Republic 411A, in the rabbinic
tradition [Midr Exod 43, see Str-B 3, 668] as well as in the Shepherd of Hermas: Vis. 3.6.7,
―when you were rich, you were useless [a[crhsto"], but now you are useful [eu[crhsto"]
… Be useful to God‖; and Mand 5. 6. 6: ―long suffering … is useful to the Lord … ill
temper … is useless‖; for further details see Lohse, 200). a[crhsto" (―useless,‖
―worthless,‖ BAG, 128, which occurs only here in the New Testament) designates Onesimus
with reference to his flight and the time before his conversion. Apparently he was useless
even before he ran away. He was a Phrygian slave and as such ―had confirmed the popular
estimate of his class and nation by his own conduct‖ (Lightfoot, 310) since Phrygian slaves
were proverbial for being unreliable and unfaithful. But a great change has occurred and
Paul describes this by means of the ―once—now‖ (potev—nuni;) contrast which he has
employed previously (see on Col 1:21, 22; note also 2:13). This mighty transformation has
been effected by Onesimus‘ conversion to Christ as Lord and he may now be described as
eu[crhsto" (―useful,‖ see BAG, 329; note also 2 Tim 2:21; 4:11; on the theological contrast
drawn see Tachau, Einst, 87, 88, and Gayer, Stellung, 252) a description that truly fits his
name for Onesimus means ―profitable‖ or ―useful‖ (BAG, 570). Paul can bear witness to this
dramatic change (ejmoiv, ―to me‖) and is confident he will give proof of his conversion as he
is welcomed back to Colossae (soiv, ―to you,‖ rather unusually precedes kai; ejmoiv, ―and to
me,‖ so Lightfoot, 338; perhaps the word-order emphasizes that Philemon will have to
satisfy himself that Onesimus has become a different person, cf. Lohse, 201).
12. With the mention of his sending Onesimus back to Philemon, Paul concludes the first
section of the body of the letter: oÔn ajnevpemfav soi, au;tovn, tou`tV e[stin ta; ejma;
splavgcna (―I am sending him—who is my very heart—back to you‖ NIV). The verb
ajnapevmpw has the meaning to ―send back,‖ ―return‖ (BAG, 59) and this is the way it has
generally been understood. Knox (Philemon, 25), however, wishes to give a technical, legal
sense to the verb, suggesting that Paul wishes to ―refer Onesimus‘ case‖ to Philemon for
Archippus‘ attention and decision. Onesimus‘ future, that is, whether he is to remain at
Colossae or be free to be Paul‘s aide, is then a matter about which Paul seeks Philemon‘s
consent (v 13). But here the verb seems to have the meaning ―send back‖ (cf. Luke 23:15)
and being an epistolary aorist (in which the writer puts himself at the point of time when
the recipient is reading his letter; note Acts 23:30; Phil 2:28; Col 4:8, so most
commentators and note Robertson, Grammar, 846, BDF, para. 334, and Turner, Syntax, 73)
is to be translated by an English present tense ―I am sending back.‖ The pronoun aujtovn
(―him,‖) after the relative o{n (―whom‖) appears to be redundant and is akin to a Hebrew
construction (in which an indeclinable relative is qualified by a direct personal pronoun:
Biblical Greek sometimes imitates this, e.g., Mark 7:25; see Moule, 145). It is probable
though that the aujtovn (―him‖) picks up again the relative pronoun before the sentence
continues: so Moule paraphrases ―whom I am sending …; and when I say (I am sending)
him, I mean my very self.‖
    In the eastern part of the Roman Empire during this period, fugitive slaves who sought
sanctuary in a household were likely to be given temporary protection by the householder
until either a reconciliation with the master had been effected or else the slave had been put
up for sale in the market and the resulting price paid to the owner (Goodenough, HTR 22
[1929] 181–83, drew attention to an Athenian law to this effect; it is suggested that this
provision survived in Egypt under the Ptolemies and well into Roman imperial times as it
influenced Ulpian‘s legislation early in the third century A.D.). The relevant Deuteronomic
law ran as follows: ―you shall not give up to his master a slave who has escaped from his
master to you; he shall dwell with you, in your midst, in the place which he shall choose
within one of your towns, where it pleases him best; you shall not oppress him‖ (Deut
23:15, 16). Although this law carried divine authority for Paul, as Bruce (Paul, 400) notes,
―he would not invoke it without Philemon‘s consent, preferring Philemon to act like a
Christian of his own free will‖ (note Bruce‘s whole discussion, Paul, 399, 400).
    He therefore sends Onesimus back with this accompanying letter (for a further
discussion of the Roman legal position in the various provinces see Stuhlmacher, 23, and
especially notes 27 and 28 for further literature). But in so doing it was as if he was sending
back himself: ta; ejma; splavgcna means ―my heart‖ but could be rendered ―my very self.‖
Köster (TDNT 7, 555) comments: ―It is as if Paul, in the runaway slave, came to Philemon
in person with his claim to experience love‖ (note also v 17 where the apostle writes:
―welcome him as you would welcome me‖; Onesimus has become very dear to him). The
frequent use of this word splavgcna (―heart,‖ vs 7, 12, 20) shows how personally Paul was
involved in the matter.
13. He now briefly describes what happened before he wrote his letter and sent Onesimus
back: o}n ejgw; ejboulovmhn pro;" ejmauto;n katevcein i{na uJpe;r sou`moi diakonh`/ ktl.
(―Indeed I would have liked to keep him with me so that he could take your place in
helping me…‖). The verb ―I would have liked‖ (ejboulovmhn) expresses Paul‘s desire or
personal preference. It speaks of an attainable wish but as the following verse, with its
sharp contrast, makes plain Paul foregoes its realization: I ―would have liked, but I do not,
or did not do it‖ (BDF, para. 359[2]; cited by Lohse, 201, note Stuhlmacher, 40; the contrast
between the two verbs of wishing ejboulovmhn and hjqevlhsa lies not so much in their
meaning as in the tenses: ejboulovmhn as an imperfect describes a desire which Paul felt for
a time while hjqevlhsa, an aorist, indicates his actual decision, cf. Burton, Syntax, 15, and
for a similar use of ejboulovmhn see Acts 25:22; note also Gal 4:20; Rom 9:3; against
Robertson, Grammar, 886, 919, who thinks it is a courteous or polite use of the imperfect
and rendered ―I was just on the point of wishing‖). Although katevcw (a more emphatic
form of e[cw, ―have‖) had a variety of meanings in extra-biblical Greek (cf. Hanse, TDNT 2,
829, and see BAG, 422, 423; it occurred as a technical term in the Hellenistic cult where the
devotee was obliged to remain in the temple at the god‘s behest), the predominant use in
both the LXX and the NT is to ―hold fast‖ (see Luke 8:15; 1 Cor 11:2; 15:2; 1 Thess 5:21;
Heb 3:6, 14; 10:23 etc). Here it has the particular sense of to ―retain‖ or ―keep with‖ (pro;"
ejmautovn means ―with me‖; see also Luke 4:42 for this sense: in v 15 the cognate ajpevcw,
to ―receive in full,‖ ―keep‖ occurs).Onesimus had rendered faithful service to Paul and it
had been the latter‘s wish that he would continue to give it in place of the absent Philemon.
The expression uJpe;r sou` (―on your behalf,‖ or more accurately ―as your representative,‖
so Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East, 335, Riesenfeld, TDNT 8, 513, Lohse, 202,
Stuhlmacher, 40) is one of delicate tact for Paul assumes that Philemon would have wished
to perform this service for him had it been possible (there is some difference of opinion
about the precise nature of the service: while the term diakonevw is as general as the English
verb ―serve,‖ and might be understood in a variety of ways it probably does not designate
menial or degrading work in prison [so rightly Bratcher and Nida, 126], but signifies
―help,‖ especially in the service of the gospel—note eujallevlion, ―gospel,‖ is used in this
clause [cf. Acts 13:5; 24:23; Phil 2:25, 30]; see Lohmeyer, 173, 191, Gayer, Stelling, 241,
and especially Ollrog, Paulus, 101–103. Stuhlmacher, 40, suggests Paul here means
concrete help including the maintenance of regular contact with the outside world). At the
same time the phrase may suggest that Onesimus is more thana mere substitute for
Philemon, and if so then the relation of master and slave disappears for the moment (so
Vincent, 186). It must also be remembered that Paul‘s circumstances are ―in the bonds of
the gospel‖ (ejn toi`" desmoi`" tou` eujaggelivou), thatis, his imprisonment is for the gospel
(BAG, 176,Moule, 146; cf. v 1, devsmio" Cristou` ÆIhsou`, which may signify ―a prisoner
for the sake of Christ Jesus,‖ so Friedrich, TDNT 2, 733, as well as one who belongs to
Christ Jesus), or the gospel is the cause of his imprisonment since it had resulted from the
preaching of the gospel (Vincent, 187; cf. Lightfoot, 339, who treats thegenitive as one of
origin). Probably both nuances are included and there is no need to choose between these
alternatives.
     14. But however much Paul was inclined to keep Onesimus he would do nothing
without Philemon‘s consent: to have done so would at the least have involved a breach of
Christian fellowship. He refuses to press Philemon to act in any way that would suggest
coercion or an intrusion into the latter‘s decision: cwri;" de; th`" sh`" gnwvmh" oujde;n
hjqevlhqa poih`sai (―But I would not do anything without your consent‖). gnwvmh, a term
which means ―opinion‖ (1 Cor 7:25, 40; 2 Cor 8:10; cf. Ecclus 6:23; 2 Macc 14:20; 4 Macc
9:27), or ―decision‖ (Acts 20:3; Rev 17:17; cf. examples in the papyri: POxy 54, 12; PFay
20, 4) has the connotation here of ―previous knowledge‖ or ―consent‖ (BAG, 163,
Bultmann, TDNT 1, 717; the preposition cwriv", ―apart from‖ is found in place of a[neu,
―without,‖ which turns up only three times in the NT: Matt 10:29; 1 Pet 3:1; 4:9). On the
aorist tense of the verb hjqevlhsa, see above at verse 13.
     Paul‘s intention was i{na mh; wJ" kata; ajnavgkhn to; ajgaqovn sou h\/ ajlla; kata;
ejkouvsion (―so that any favor you do will be spontaneous and not forced‖). His overriding
concern is that Philemon should be free to decide for himself as to how he should act (so
Schweizer, EvT 32 [1972] 505); there should not be even the slightest hint of coercion or
any intrusion into Philemon‘s decision (so wJ", ―as if,‖ means it will not even have the
appearance of being by constraint, Lightfoot, 340, von Soden, 76, Lohse, 202). The contrast
mh; wJ" kata; ajnavgkhn—ajlla; kata; ejkouvsion (―not by compulsion but of your own free
will‖) was a common one, frequently found in the papyri (cf. Lohmeyer, 188, and Lohse,
202; note also 1 Pet 5:2 for the same antithesis). The first phrase (ajnavgkh, ―necessity,‖
―compulsion,‖ turns up in Paul at Rom 13:5; 1 Cor 7:26, 37; 9:16; 2 Cor 6:4; 9:7; 12:10; 1
Thess 3:7) refers to the outward pressure or force that is laid on someone by which he is
forced to act in a certain way (Bratcher and Nida, 126); while the latter points to a decision
that is freely arrived at (eJkouvsio", ―willing,‖ ―voluntary,‖ occurs only here in the Pauline
corpus; cf. Num 15:3, kaq j ejkouvsion, of a ―free-will offering,‖ and Heb 10:26: note BAG,
243, and Hauck, TDNT 2, 470). The expression to; ajgaqovn sou (―your good deed,‖ here the
neuter singular is used ―in an individual sense of a particular definite thing or act,‖ BDF,
para. 263[1], see also Turner, Syntax, 13) is akin to the language of Paul‘s intercession for
Philemon in verse 6 with its reference to ―every blessing‖ (panto;" ajgaqou`). Up to this
point nothing is stated explicitly about the nature of this good deed (Ernst, 135).
    15. The apostle gives an additional reason for his decision (gavr, ―for,‖ explains a
further motive of hjqejlhsa, ―I decided‖: Lightfoot, 340, Vincent, 188; cf. Zmijewski,
BibLeb 15 [1974] 289; Knox, Philemon, 22–24, agrees that this sentence bears a close
relation to the preceding but interprets the relationship differently; see below) not to detain
Onesimus, namely, that he might well have acted contrary to God‘s hidden purpose: tavca
ga;r dia; tou`to ejcwrivsqh pro;" w{ran i{na aivwJnion aujto;n ajpevch/" (―perhaps the reason
he was separated from you for a little while was that you might have him back for ever‖).
Within the sentence a sharp contrast is drawn between the pro;" w{ran (―for a little while‖)
of the principal clause and the aijw;nion (―for ever‖) of the i{na clause. This contrast finds its
correspondence (cf. Zmijewski, BibLeb 15 [1974] 289) in the two verbs cwrivzw (to
―separate‖) and ajpevcw (to ―have back‖). The passive ejcwrijsqh (―he was separated from‖)
denotes that God‘s hidden purpose (in Hebrew the so-called ―divine passive,‖ especially in
the apocalyptic literature, was employed to signify the hidden action of God as the person
responsible for what was done; most commentators take this line, cf. for example Lohse,
202, Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 274, Martin, NCB, 166, Ernst, 135, Caird, 222) may have been
behind this incident. But Paul puts forward this suggestion about God‘s purpose modestly
with the adverb tavca (―perhaps,‖ ―possibly,‖ or ―probably,‖ so BAG, 806; it usually occurs
with a[n and the optative mood, but in the two NT passages where the word appears, Rom
5:7 and here, the indicative is used without a[n: see BDF, para, 385[1]; note Wisd 13:6;
Poxy40, 7; PhiloAetM 54; Josephus, Ant 6, 33; 18, 277), since he is not assuming an
acquaintance with God‘s designs. The language has been chosen carefully as Philemon‘s
attention is turned from individual wrongs he may have incurred to God‘s providence
which has made these wrongs work for good (note Chrysostom‘s comparison of Joseph
who, when making himself known to his brothers said: ―I am your brother Joseph, the one
you sold into Egypt! And now, do not be distressed and do not be angry with yourselves for
selling me here, because it was to save lives that God sent me ahead of you … So then, it
was not you who sent me here, but God,‖ Gen 45:4–8, NIV). pro;" w{ran means ―for a
while,‖ ―for a moment‖ (w{ra, ―hour,‖ is used to denote ―a short period of time‖: the same
phrase occurs at John 5:35; 2 Cor 7:8; Gal 2:5; note also 1 Thess 2:17; Rev 17:12; 18:10,
17, 19, BAG, 896). The expression is indefinite and although the period of separation is not
specified here ―it was but ‗an hour‘ as compared with its lasting consequences‖ (Vincent,
188).
    If indeed God‘s hidden purpose lay behind this incident then the divine intention (dia;
tou`to, ―for this reason,‖ is explicated by the i{na clause which follows and which therefore
spells out the purpose of Onesimus‘ separation; Stauffer, TDNT 3, 329, and Zmijewski,
BibLeb 15 [1974] 289, regard the i{na as a ―theological‖ i{na; note the similar construction
with dia; tou`to, for this reason,‖ followed by i{na, ―that,‖ at 2 Cor 13:10; 1 Tim 1:16, and
see BAG, 597 under 2bb) was that Philemon should receive him back in a new relationship
that would endure for ever. There is some difference of opinion as to the significance of
ajpevch/" in connection with aijwvnion. The verb ajpevcw was used in the active voice as a
commercial technical term meaning to ―receive [a sum] in full [and give a receipt for it],‖ a
connotation it has at Philippians 4:8 (―I have received full payment [ajpevcw de; pavnta],
and more‖) in a context where other commercial terms and ideas are found (J. Gnilka, Der
Philipperbrief [HTKNT 10/3; Frieburg: Herder, 1968] 179; for further examples from the
papyri see Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East, 110–12, and BAG, 84, 85). The
language of commerce is employed elsewhere in this letter to Philemon (note the exegesis
of vv 17–19), and Knox (Philemon, 22–24) renders the whole phrase as ―in order that you
might freely relinquish your claim to him forever.‖ It is not certain that this full commercial
significance of the verb is to be pressed, and the usual rendering ―that you may receive him
back‖ seems preferable.But how is aijwvnion to be interpreted? Moule (156) claims that in
this context it appears to mean ―for good‖ or ―permanently,‖ just as in Exodus 21:7 (cf .
Deut 15:17) where the regulations for voluntary slavery speak of the Israelite being a
―servant for life‖ (the LXX has eij" to;n aijw`na for the Hebrew ). Moule further states
it should not be assumed (without additional evidence) that the term carries a deeper
meaning here such as ―forever,‖ although on occasion aijwvnio" does have this connotation.
The deeper relationship as Christians, it is argued, is described in the next verse (cf. Sasse,
TDNT 1, 209, Merk, Handeln, 226, 227). But in our judgment Paul is already in verse 15
speaking of the new relationship of this master to his slave, a relationship in the Lord Jesus
Christ which is ―for ever.‖ To get Onesimus back permanently means not to receive him
back simply as a slave, but to acquire him permanently as a Christian brother (Gayer,
Stellung, 243, argues that aijwvnion cannot properly be understood in this context with
reference to Onesimus‘ legal status as a slave for an unlimited period of time; his legal
position as a slave is hardly in view at all: cf. Dibelius-Greeven, 107, Sevenster, Paul, 189,
and H. Ridderbos, Paul. An Outline of His Theology. Tr J. R. DeWitt [Grand Rapids, MI;
Eerdmans, 1975] 318). Such an interpretation does not contradict the notion that
subsequently he could be away from his master physically, sent back to minister to Paul
(see on v 21 against Caird, 222).
    16. The one whom Philemon will receive back for ever is ―a beloved brother‖: oujkevti
wJ" dou`lon ajlla; ujpe;r dou`lon, ajdelfo;n ajgaphtovn (―no longer as a slave, but as one who
is much more than a slave, as a beloved brother‖). Grammatically this verse contains a long
addition which stands in apposition to aujtovn (―him‖) of the previous verse, and in these
words Onesimus is described. For the first time the term ―slave‖ (dou`lo") is used with
reference to him; but this is immediately qualified by means of an antithesis: he will be far
more than a slave to his master. Again it is noted that Paul has chosen his words carefully:
oujkevti wJ" dou`lon (―no longer as a slave‖) is not stating that Philemon is to receive
Onesimus back as a freed man and no longer a slave, or that he is to free him immediately
on his return (against Jang, Philemonbrief, 15, who suggests Paul is waiting for Philemon
to give Onesimus his freedom). Rather, the wJ" (―as‖) ―expresses the subjective evaluation
of the relationship without calling its objective form into question‖ (von Soden, 76; who
adds ―therefore the line of thought found in 1 Cor 7:20–24 is not exceeded,‖ cited by
Lohse, 203, Gayer, Stellung, 236, and others; had Paul wished to describe the latter and
therefore suggest that the runaway slave was to be freed, he would have simply written
dou`lon, ―a slave,‖ instead of wJ" dou`lon, ―as a slave,‖ cf. Lightfoot, 340, 341, Vincent, 188,
189, Lohmeyer, 189, and Bratcher and Nida, 127, 128, with the latter‘s criticisms of the
RSV rendering). In other words, whether Onesimus remained a slave or not, he could no
longer be regarded as a slave. A change had been effected in him independent of his
possible manumission (Lightfoot, 341, adds the further point that the negative oujkevti, ―no
longer,‖ rather than mhkevti, with the same meaning, describes the actual state of Onesimus,
not the possible view of Philemon: ―The ‗no more as a slave‘ is an absolute fact, whether
Philemon chooses to recognise it or not‖). Instead (ajllav here is adversative) Onesimus is
more than a slave (the preposition uJpevr with the accusative, having an original spatial
meaning ―beyond,‖ is employed in a transferred sense denoting ―exceeding,‖ ―above,‖
―more than‖: 1 Cor 4:6; 10:13; 2 Cor 1:8; 8:3; 12:6, so Riesenfeld, TDNT 8, 515, BDF, para.
230, and BAG, 838, 839), and what this ―more‖ signifies is expressed in the following
words: he is ―a beloved brother‖ (ajdelfo;n ajgaphtovn is in epexegetical apposition to
ujpe;rdou`lon, ―more than a slave,‖ so von Soden, 77, Vincent, 189, and Zmijewski, BibLeb
15 [1974] 289).
Contemporary popular philosophy, particularly Stoicism, had already recognized the idea
of the equality of all men; so, for example, Seneca in his famous forty-seventh letter to
Lucilius, in which he discourses at length on how to treat slaves, commented: ―Kindly
remember that he whom you call your slave sprang from the same stock, is smiled upon by
the same skies, and on equal terms with yourself breathes, lives and dies‖ (Epist 47.10; cf.
44.1, ―All men, if traced back to their original source, spring from the gods,‖ and Pliny,
Epist 9.21.24; note Sevenster, Paul, 185–92). Paul, however, appeals not as did pagan
authors to their birth from the same stock or to the same path of life from birth to death, but
to their common belonging to the same Lord (Paul is also different from the mystery
religions which considered a slave who had been initiated was no longer reckoned as a
slave, but lived with his former owner as a free man; cf. the treatment by Gayer, Stellung,
237–40, on the theme of the slave as a brother in popular philosophy, the mystery religions,
the OT and Judaism. He concludes [240] that there was no religious fellowship in the
ancient world which included a slave as a brother in a new relationship at such a deep
personal level as we find here in Paul).
     Onesimus, in being spoken of as ―a [beloved] brother,‖ is addressed in precisely the
same way as Philemon (so vv 7, 20: ajdelfev, ―brother‖); he too has been incorporated into
the body of Christ and consequently the relationship of slave owner to slave within the
framework of the existing structures is to be conducted in the light of belonging to the same
Lord (S. Schulz, Gott ist kein Sklavenhalter. Die Geschichte einer verspäteten Revolution,
1972, 183). The relationship between the two men is deepened, the terms ―master‖ and
―slave‖ are transcended, as Paul in the final words of this verse attempts to bring before
Philemon some of the consequences: mavlista ejmoiv, povsw/ de; ma`llon soi; kai; ejn sarki;
kai; ejn kurivw/. (―Especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the
Lord‖). Paul‘s words contain a heightened comparison: mavlista which is superlative in
form is used here as an elative with the meaning ―especially‖ (also Acts 20:38; 1 Tim 4:10;
5:17; 2 Tim 4:13; Titus 1:10, see BAG, 488, 489, BDF, para. 60, Vincent, 189, Moule, 148,
Lohse, 203, and Stuhlmacher, 42, against Lightfoot, 341). The comparison is then
heightened by povsw/ ma`llon (―how much more‖) which followsú If Onesimus is a beloved
brother in the highest sense for Paul, then he is also for Philemon in a double sense: kai; ejn
sarki; kai; ejn kurivw/, that is, in a natural human relationship to Philemon (as his slave) and
more than this, as one bound with him ejn kurivw/ (―in the Lord‖). cf. Zmijewski, BibLeb 15
(1974) 290. Philemon 16 is the only verse in which sajrx (―flesh‖) and kuvrio" (―Lord‖) are
linked together by kai; (―and‖; noted by Lohmeyer, 189, who is cited by later
commentators). Here savrx ―denotes the circle of purely human relations irrespective of the
fact that the slave and his master are also believers in the Lord‘s kingdom … The reference
is to social relations rather than kinship‖ (Schweizer, TDNT 7, 127; cf. Dibelius-Greeven,
106, ―as a man and as a Christian,‖ against Preiss, Life, 40). Schweizer rightly adds ―it is
especially plain that the two spheres are not mutually exclusive. But the sphere of savrx is
not the decisive one.‖ Onesimus‘ earthly relationship with Philemon is now determined by
the union ejn kuri;w/ (―in the Lord‖).
It is quite clear that in this letter Paul is not really dealing with the question of slavery as
such or the resolution of a particular instance of slavery. In this verse, at least, he treats the
question of brotherly love. Although Onesimus‘ earthly freedom may be of positive value,
in the last analysis it is of no ultimate significance to him as a Christian as to whether he is
slave or free. Finally what matters is to have accepted God‘s call and to follow him (1 Cor
7:21–24; on this see S. S. Bartchy, MADDON CPHSAI. First-Century Slavery and the
Interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:21 [SBLDS 11; Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1971] and
Gayer, Stellung, 172–222).
     17. Paul mentioned the fact of his request of Philemon for Onesimus in verse 10. Only
here does he actually spell out its content (so Friedrich, 194, Suhl, Kairos 15 [1973] 274,
Stuhlmacher, 49, and Gayer, Stellung, 234) and come to the real point of the letter (so
rightly von Soden, 77, and Ernst, 136). In the previous verses (13–16) the apostle looked
back to the time when Onesimus sought refuge with him. The runaway slave subsequently
became a Christian and now Paul sends him back to Philemon as ―a beloved brother‖ (v
16). Only after he has carefully made these remarks does Paul indicate the nature of his
specific request (according to BDF, para. 451[1], ―After parenthetical remarks ou|n
[―therefore‖] indicates a return to the main theme,‖ i.e. the conjunction is resumptive; see
also Lohse, 203): eij ou|n me e[xei" koinwnovn, proslabou` aujto;n wJ" ejmev (―So then, if you
consider me your partner, welcome him as you would me‖). He bases his appeal on the
close tie that exists between himself and Philemon, a tie that is described by means of the
word koinwnov". This term (―companion,‖ ―partner,‖ ―sharer,‖ according to BAG, 439, 440)
was used (in the plural) of those who shared common interests or engaged in the same
endeavors (Lohse, 203; Lightfoot, 341, says koinwnoiv are those who have ―common
interests, common feelings, common work‖). Although koinwnov" could designate a
―business-partner‖ (cf. Luke 5:10) it is not employed here of business transactions
(Campbell, Studies, 10, rightly observes that in ―this whole passage Paul makes half-playful
but very effective use of business terms in writing of the spiritual relationship between
Philemon and himself‖; but this does not mean koinwnov" is being used with a technical
significance, ―business-partner,‖ as in Luke 5:10: note the criticisms of Ollrog, Paulus, 77).
Nor is Paul referring especially to ties of friendship. Rather, Philemon‘s and his koinwniva
is that fellowship with God‘s Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, into which both of them have
been called (1 Cor 1:9). This relationship has drawn them together in common activities,
and thus koinwnov" in this context may have the added nuance of ―co-worker‖ (note 2 Cor
8:23 where koinwnov" and sunergov", ―fellow-worker,‖ are conjoined with reference to
Titus).
Paul not only intercedes on behalf of Onesimus; he also identifies himself with him:
―receive him as me‖ (wJ" ejmev). This last expression corresponds to his earlier statement in
verse 12 that his returning Onesimus was equivalent to sending himself back (ta; ejma;
splavgcna, lit. ―my heart‖). Paul‘s request, which is short and concise (Lohmeyer, 189),
means at least that Onesimus should be treated as a fellow-Christian just as Paul himself
would be treated (M. McDermott, ―The Biblical Doctrine of KOINWNIA,‖ BZ 19 [1975]
228, 229). In addition, if the suggestion above about koinwnov" having the nuance of
―co-worker‖ is correct, then Paul‘s expression here may mean he wants Onesimus to be
accepted back both as a Christian and as Paul‘s colleague (proslambavnw was regularly
used with koinwnovn to mean to ―take on as a partner‖: see LSJ, 1518, 1519; cf. MM, 549, and
Knox, Philemon, 24).
    18. In a sentence that is formally parallel to the preceding (see above) the apostle guards
against any possible hindrances to Philemon‘s favorable reception of Onesimus. He thus
speaks about the financial aspects of the slave‘s escape since he does not want the
reconciliation between Philemon and Onesimus to collapse because of ―any demand for
compensation‖ (H. Gülzow, cited by Stuhlmacher, 49): eij de; ti hjdivkhsevn hÔ ojfeivlei (―if
he has wronged you or owes you anything‖) is an introductory conditional clause and has
been taken: (a) as a sentence which is hypothetical only in form but which describes the
actual offense of Onesimus. So Caird, 222, 223, comments: ―Paul knows very well that
Onesimus has wronged his master and owes him a considerable sum of money. He must
have helped himself to at least enough to pay his way to Rome.‖ But this conclusion is no
more than an inference (the interpretation has been held with varying degrees of conviction:
see Bratcher and Nida, 129, ―it most certainly was not [doubtful],‖ though note their later
qualification; Lightfoot, 341, said Onesimus ―probably had robbed‖ Philemon; while
Vincent, 190, speaks of Onesimus‘ ―possibly‖ robbing his master; Stuhlmacher, 49,
suggests that the double expression, hjdivkhsen,‖ ―wronged‖ [see further on Col 3:25], and
ojfeivlei, ―owes,‖ indicates Onesimus not only wronged his master by running away but
also had pilfered some of his money; cf. Dibelius-Greeven, 106, Scott, 98, and Friedrich,
193). (b) The sentence is a conditional one and may simply suggest that his overdue
absence from Colossae (is it possible—as Bruce, Paul, 400, questions—that his master had
sent him to Paul to fulfill some commission and that Onesimus overstayed his leave?) or his
running away meant he owed his master the value of the work that should have been done
(Martin, NCB, 167; Gayer, Stellung, 230, considers Paul might well have used o{,
―whatever,‖ rather than a conditional clause had he wished to make it plain that Onesimus
had actually wronged his master; note also Lohmeyer, 190, Lohse, 204, and Suhl, Kairos,
15 [1973] 269).
    Either way Philemon is asked to let the outstanding damages resulting from Onesimus‘
flight (or absence) be charged to the apostle‘s account: tou`toejmoi; ejllovga (―Put that on
my bill‖). ejllogevw (on the unusual formation ejllovga see BDF, para. 90 and BAG, 252) was
a commercial technical term meaning to ―charge to someone‘s account‖ as the papyri show
(PStrassb 1.32.10: ―so that in this way he can settle accounts with him‖ [ejnloghqh`/]; for
further examples see Preisker, TDNT 2, 516, 517, BAG, 252, and Lohse, 204; there is only
one other instance in the NT, viz. Rom 5:13). As a father for his son (cf. v 10) Paul declares
he is prepared to stand good for any damages.
19. ejgw; Pau`lo" e[graya th`/ ejmh`/ ceiri;, ejgw; ajpotivsw (―I Paul am writing this with my
own hand. I will pay it‖). These words of verse 19a are a parenthesis (Lohse, 204,
Zmijewski, BibLeb 15 [1974] 290, 291, and Gayer, Stellung, 256) as Paul inserts his own
legal promissory note or IOU (the introduction of his own name [see v 9] together with the
twofold emphatic ejgwv, ―I,‖ gives the statement the character of a formal and binding
signature: see Lightfoot, 342, and Zmijewski, BibLeb 15 [1974] 291), undertaking to make
compensation for the damages (ajpotivnw, which occurs only here in the NT, is a legal
technical term, found frequently in the papyri [cf. POxy 2.275.27], meaning to ―make
compensation,‖ ―pay the damages,‖ see BAG, 101, cf. Deissmann, Light from the Ancient
East, 332, who notes it is a much stronger term than ajpodwvsw, ―I will give back‖). The
reference to Paul writing (e[graya is an epistolary aorist: see on v 12) these words in his
own hand was taken by Lightfoot, Roller and others to indicate that he composed and wrote
the whole letter personally (Lightfoot, 342, Roller, Formular, 592, and Müller, 188; cf.
Rom 16:22; 1 Cor 16:21; Gal 6:11; 2 Thess 3:17). Dibelius-Greeven drew the opposite
conclusion, namely that the rest of the letter was dictated (106, 107; Scott, 112, note
Friedrich, 195, Bratcher and Nida, 130: ―Here Paul takes the stylus and writes these words
himself.‖ cf. G.J. Bahr, ―The Subscriptions in the Pauline Letters,‖ JBL 87 [1968] 27–41,
who suggests that the subscriptions had a legal function: they summarized the document in
the contractor‘s own hand binding him to its details). But one cannot determine with
certainty from these incidental remarks the manner in which Paul composed his letters; note
Vincent, 190, Lohse, 204, and Doty, Letters, 41, who adds that in Hellenistic official letter
records the writer might add a résumé of the document in his own writing showing he was
aware of its contents and details. He thinks that such a situation is suggested by these
remarks of Paul in verse 19.
    After the parenthesis the rest of the sentence picks up the thought of verse 18: i}na mh;
levgw soi o[ti kai; seautovn moi prosofeivlei" (―not to mention that you owe me your
very self besides‖). In the opening words (i{na mh; levgw: note the unusual mhv, ―not,‖ with
the indicative) a sort of elliptical construction is employed ―in which the writer delicately
protests against saying something which he nevertheless does say‖ (Vincent, 190; cf. BDF,
para. 495[1], and note 2 Cor 9:4). If the discussion is to focus on debts then Paul reminds
the addressee that it is he, Philemon, who is indebted to the apostle. (Mutual obligations
have been established: cf. Rom 15:26, 27 and note Stuhlmacher‘s discussion, 50). The
words have been chosen carefully—prosofeivlei" (―you owe [besides],‖ cf. PHib 63.14,
―what you owe me [besides],‖ and note BAG, 717, who claims it is difficult to find any
special force in the preposition pro" and so to differentiate it from the simple verb, to ―owe
something‖) clearly corresponds to ojfeivlei (―[if] he owes‖) in the preceding verse while
there is an interesting interplay of pronouns in the first and second persons (v 18 ―if he has
wronged you charge that to me‖; v 19, ― … I will repay … you owe yourself to me‖)—as
Paul indicates it was through him that Philemon had been converted (it has been suggested
that Philemon‘s conversion was only indirectly due to Paul‘s ministry as he sent out his
colleagues, especially Epaphras, to the Lycus valley region including Colossae: however,
the expression appears to be stronger than this indicating Paul was personally and directly
responsible for Philemon‘s conversion; the latter may have met Paul outside the Lycus
Valley [cf. Col 2:2]; perhaps such an encounter took place on a visit to Ephesus). He
therefore owed his spiritual life to Paul and that was a far greater debt than Onesimus had
incurred and for which Paul would be responsible. The message is plain. Philemon will
understand that Onesimus has experienced the same grace and mercy of God when he was
converted. He should therefore receive him as a brother in Christ and not be angry with him
even though there may be good grounds for it (Lohse, 205).
    20. The principal section of the letter is concluded with Paul strengthening his request.
He once again addresses Philemon as a Christian brother and expresses the wish that he
may have great joy in him in the Lord: nai;, ajdelfe;, ejgwv sou ojnaivmhn ejn kurivw/.
ajnavpausovn mou ta; splavgcna ejn Cristw`/ (―Yes, brother, I do wish that I may have some
benefit from you in the Lord; refresh my heart in Christ‖). The particle naiv (―yes,‖
―indeed,‖ ―certainly‖), which can denote affirmation, agreement or emphasis (BAG, 532,
533), here strengthens Paul‘s appeal (note Phil 4:3, ―Yes indeed, I ask you too [nai; ejrwtw`
kai; sev],‖ and cf. Matt 11:26; Luke 10:21; 11:51; 12:5). No fresh request is made beyond
that of verse 17; Paul simply wishes that Philemon would fulfill his heart‘s desire. Once
again ajdelfev (―brother,‖ cf. v 7), the affectionate term of address, is used. Lightfoot (342)
aptly remarks: ―It is the entreaty of a brother to a brother on behalf of a brother‖ (see v 16
where the apostle had called Onesimus ―a beloved brother,‖ and note Friedrich, 195). This
desire finds expression in a formula which was frequent in current usage although Paul uses
it only here (the verb ojninhmi in the first person aorist optative meaning ―may I have joy,
profit or benefit,‖ ―may I enjoy‖ [with the genitive case of the thing or person that is the
source of the joy] turns up frequently: Ignatius, Eph 2:2; Mag 2; 12:1; Rom 5:2; Pol 1:1;
6:2; for further examples see BAG, 570; the optative mood, which apart from this reference
in the NT always occurs in the third person singular [cf. Burton, Syntax, 79, Moulton,
Prolegomena, 195, Robertson, Grammar, 939], is used to denote an attainable wish: BDF,
paras. 65[2], 384). Although the expression was often thought to continue the word-play on
the name of Onesimus this is doubtful in the light of the frequent occurrence of the
expression elsewhere (note the statement of BDF, para. 488[1b]; cf. Lohse, 205, Martin,
NCB, 167, and Gayer, Stellung, 242). The apostle‘s earnest wish concerns the future of
Onesimus. But Paul is closely and personally identified with him: the emphatic ejgwv (―I‖)
joins the cause of Onesimus with his own so that he, Paul, will also benefit from
Philemon‘s action (cf. Lightfoot, 342, Lohmeyer, 191), and that ―in the Lord‖ (ejn kurivw/).
This latter phrase has been understood as referring to Philemon‘s giving a benefit to Paul
―in a Christian way‖ (so Martin, NCB, 167), i.e. by fulfilling his request; alternatively it is
thought that by freeing Onesimus for the service of the gospel, the benefit will truly be ―in
the Lord‖ (Lohmeyer, 191; cf. Knox, Philemon, 25, and see below on v 21).
At the conclusion of his introductory thanksgiving paragraph Paul had referred to
Philemon‘s acts of love by which ―the hearts of the saints have been refreshed‖ (ta;
splavgcna tw`n ajgivwn ajnapevpautai, v 7). Now in the final sentence of the body of the
letter he clothes his request of Philemon with similar words in anticipation that this dear
brother will once again act in love and ―refresh the heart,‖ this time the heart of the apostle
(note the emphatic position of mou, ―my,‖ in mou ta; splavgcna, ―my heart‖), by fulfilling
the express wish of verse 17 and so by receiving Onesimus in place of Paul himself (ejn
Cristw`/, ―in Christ,‖ is here a stylistic variant of ejn kurivw/, ―in the Lord,‖ cf. Moule,
Origin, 59; Philemon‘s action of refreshing Paul will be a Christian one, effected on behalf
of a brother who is ―in Christ‖).

Explanation
     In a carefully structured paragraph (vv 8–20) in which he weighs his words carefully,
Paul makes his plea for Onesimus, Philemon‘s runaway slave. He begins with a brief
description of his situation (vv 8–12), indicating that although he has the boldness or
openness in Christ to command Philemon to do what is proper for him as a Christian in the
circumstances concerning Onesimus, he refuses to enforce compliance with his word.
Rather, he bases his appeal on other grounds, namely, Philemon‘s love. It is precisely
because he knows of Philemon‘s kindness and generosity in the past that he is able to
entreat, and he looks forward to Philemon‘s love being shown once again, this time with
reference to Onesimus. Behind the request stands one who is both an ambassador and a
slave of Christ Jesus and his plea is made on behalf of his child Onesimus, who was
converted through his ministry while he was in prison. He indicates how very dear he has
become to him by stating he is sending back one who is his very heart. As a Phrygian
slave—and they were proverbial for being unreliable and unfaithful—he had previously
been useless to Philemon. But a great change has occurred and Paul describes this by a
―once-now‖ contrast. This mighty transformation had been effected by Onesimus‘
conversion to Christ as Lord, and he might now be called ―useful,‖ a description that truly
fits his name for Onesimus means ―profitable‖ or ―useful.‖ Paul would dearly have liked to
retain Onesimus with him, so that he might take Philemon‘s place in assisting him in the
preaching of the gospel, especially as he was in prison on its account. But it would have
been illegal for Paul to act in this way, apart from involving a breach of Christian
fellowship between himself and Philemon. However, he would do nothing without the
latter‘s consent or act in such a way that might suggest coercion or an intrusion into
Philemon‘s decision. Further, had Paul detained Onesimus he might well have acted
contrary to God‘s hidden purpose: ―perhaps he (Onesimus) was separated from you for a
little while so that you might have him back for ever.‖ Paul puts forward this suggestion
modestly, since he is not presuming to be acquainted with God‘s designs. At the same time
his language, which has been chosen carefully, is intended to turn Philemon‘s attention
from the individual wrongs he may have incurred to God‘s providence which has made
these wrongs work for good (cf. Gen 45:4–8).
    Finally, Paul spells out the specific content of his request: ―welcome him as you would
welcome me‖ (v 17). Although he has just referred to Onesimus as a ―slave,‖ Paul
immediately qualifies this by means of an antithesis: he will be far more than a slave to his
master—a beloved brother. And it is precisely in this capacity that he wants Philemon to
receive Onesimus. He is not asking that Onesimus be received back as a freed man, or that
Philemon is to free him immediately on his return. Onesimus, by being spoken of as a
―brother,‖ is addressed in exactly the same way as Philemon (cf. vv 7, 20): he too has been
incorporated into the body of Christ. Thus the relationship between the two men is
deepened so that, in a sense, the terms ―master‖ and ―slave‖ are transcended, and their
behavior ought to be conducted in the light of their belonging to the same Lord. Although
Onesimus‘ earthly freedom may be of positive value, finally it is of no ultimate significance
to him as a Christian as to whether he is slave or free. In the end what matters is to have
accepted God‘s call and to follow him (cf. 1 Cor 7:21–24).
To guard against any possible hindrances to Philemon‘s favorable reception of Onesimus,
Paul urges that any outstanding damages resulting from the latter‘s flight (or absence) be
charged to his own account. ―Put that on my bill‖ are the words of the apostle‘s promissory
note to which he then adds his own signature. He does not wish to mention it, but because
Philemon himself has been converted through the ministry of Paul, he owes the apostle his
own spiritual life and that is a far greater debt than Onesimus has incurred and for which
Paul would be responsible. The message is plain. Philemon will understand that Onesimus
has experienced the same grace and mercy of God when he was converted. He should
therefore receive him as a brother in Christ and not be angry with him even though there
may be good grounds for it. Paul concludes the body of his letter by strengthening his
request and expressing the wish that Philemon may refresh his heart in Christ.




Final Remarks and Greetings (21–25)
Bibliography
Dory, W. G. Letters, 12, 36–42. Funk, R. W. ―The Apostolic Parousia: Form and Significance.‖
Christian History and Interpretation. Studies Presented to John Knox, ed. W. R. Farmer and others.
Cambridge: University Press, 1967, 249–68. Hainz, J. , 206–209. Mullins, T. Y. ―Visit
Talk in New Testament Letters.‖ CBQ 35 (1973) 350–58. Wiles, G. P. Prayers, 281–84.

Translation
       21
        Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even more
   than I say. 22At the same time, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that I will be
   restored to you in answer to your prayers.
23
 Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you greetings. 24As also do Mark,
Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my co-workers. 25The grace of thea Lord Jesus Christ be with
your spirit.b

Notes
    a. he Textus Receptus adds hJmw`n, ―our,‖ after kurivou, ―Lord‖: so A C D K 614 it vg etc If
the pronoun was present originally, then it is hard to explain its omission in a
     P
         33 81 and others. On the other hand, scribes were prone to introduce these sorts of
expansions. The shorter reading is preferred (see Metzger, Textual Commentary, 658).
b. Several manuscripts (a
 C Dc
      ), versions and Fathers append a liturgical ajmhvn (―Amen‖), but good representatives of
the Alexandrian and Western text types (A D* 048 33 81 1881) have resisted this tendency.

Form/Structure/Setting
Paul brings his letter to Philemon to a conclusion with a few brief sentences. In verses 21
and 22 he assures Philemon of his confidence that the latter will certainly do what is right,
and then announces he is planning to visit him. Paul‘s desire is that the intercessions of
Philemon and his household for him will be heard so that he will be able to journey to
Colossae in freedom. A short list of greetings (vv 23, 24) and the benediction (v 25)
conclude the letter.

Comment
    21. With his final remarks and greetings Paul brings the letter to Philemon to a close.
He glances back at the matter previously mentioned and assures Philemon, as he writes to
him, of his confidence in his obedience (pepoiqw;" th`/ uJpakoh`/ sou e[grayav soi). The
term uJpakohv, which means ―obedience‖ rather than ―readiness‖ or ―willingness‖ (cf. the
―Bereitwilligkeit‖ of Dibelius-Greenven, 106; Wickert, ZNW 52 [1961] 233, has argued
against this translation and in favor of ―obedience,‖ the usual meaning of the term; cf. BAG,
837, and note Col 3:20 with reference to the cognate uJpakouvw, to ―obey‖), seems rather
unusual here. Paul has expressly rejected the use of his apostolic right to command
Philemon and instead bases his appeal on love (see the exegesis of vv 8, 9 above). Yet the
term uJpakohv (―obedience‖) is a strong one signifying men‘s obedience to God (Rom 6:16)
or to his will as expressed in the gospel (Rom 15:18; 16:19), as well as to his chosen
representatives, the apostle and his emissaries (2 Cor 7:15; 10:6). uJpakohv is employed of
Christ‘s obedience (Heb 5:8) to God (Rom 5:10) as well as of that obedience to Christ into
which Paul intends to bring every thought captive (2 Cor 10:5). So does the presence of this
authoritative term ―obedience‖ suggest that when Paul referred to his request of or appeal to
Philemon (v 9) he was simply speaking in a rhetorical fashion and that his apostolic
authority was, in fact, being exercised in these words? Stuhlmacher (52) has rightly posed
the question along these lines for he, as few other commentators, has seen the issue clearly
(Dibelius-Greeven, 106, tried to solve the dilemma with the rendering of uJpakohv as
―willingness‖ or ―readiness‖). Others speak of ―obedience‖ as being ―the only appropriate
response that the addressee can give to the word of the Apostle‖ (so Lohse, 206; cf.
Wickert, ZNW 52 [1961] 233, and Hainz, Ekklesia, 206, 207); since Paul‘s request is the
word of an apostle then Philemon is duty-bound to obey. But to interpret the statement
along these lines is to fly in the face of the plain words of verses 8 and 9, and positive
noises about Pauline dialectic (cf. Hainz, Ekklesia, 208) do not resolve the dilemma.
Paul has already made it clear in his introduction that he has interceded for Philemon
regarding his understanding and generosity (see on v 6), a generosity that Paul obviously
desires will be effective in the case of Onesimus. Such an intercession, like its parallels in
his other introductory paragraphs (Phil 1:9–11; Col 1:9, 10; 1 Thess 3:11–13; 2 Thess 1:11,
12), is a petition for a deeper understanding of God‘s will and the performance of it in love.
Here the writer expresses his confidence that Philemon will be obedient to that will of God.
He has prayed to that end, and there has been clear evidence of Philemon‘s obedience in the
past, demonstrated so concretely in his continuous generosity as he has refreshed the hearts
of the saints (v 7; cf. Stuhlmacher, 52, 53).
    As Philmon is obedient to the will of God so Paul says he ―knows that you will do even
more than I say‖ (eijdw;" o{ti kai; uJpe;r a} levgw poihvsei"). These words are tantalizing.
The author has said expressly that he wants Philemon to receive Onesimus as he would
himself (v 17). But what is the ―more‖ that he so tactfully does not spell out? Preiss (Life,
36) thinks that Onesimus is to be received back home by Philemon for the service of the
gospel, and not in order to be reinstated as a domestic slave. Lightfoot (343) discusses the
possibility of manumission and comments: ―… the idea would seem to be present to his
thoughts, though the word never passes his lips.‖ However, Dibelius-Greeven‘s remark
(107) appears to be correct: ―The legal side of the matter is not in view at all.‖ In other
words the issue is not simply the legal release of Onesimus. Paul has already indicated he
would have liked to keep Onesimus so that he could have served with him in the gospel
(note the exegesis of v 13). As we read between the lines it seems best to interpret the
―more‖ as a desire of the apostle for Onesimus to be returned to him for the service of the
gospel (so Lohmeyer, 191, Knox, Philemon, 24–26, Harrison, ATR 32 [1950] 276–80;
Wiles, Prayers, 216, 221, Bruce, Paul, 406; for a contrary view see Wickert, ZNW 52
[1961] 230–38, and Lohse 206).
    22. The writer then indicates that he hopes to come in person and visit Philemon. So he
requests the latter to prepare quarters for him. No doubt by making this announcement he
lends a certain emphasis to his intercession for Onesimus since he will obviously be able to
see for himself how things have gone (cf. Lohse, 206, 207). References such as this to his
future ―presence‖ have been the subject of detailed epistolary study in recent times. It has
been suggested that this feature at the close of the epistle, called a ―travelogue,‖ is no
courtesy remark but a deliberately phrased convention, known from letter forms in the
Greco-Roman world (Doty, Letters, 12, 36, 37, and Martin, NCB, 169). Funk (History,
249–68) has examined this travelogue form in some detail (notably at Rom 15:14–33; 1
Cor 4:14–21; Phil 2:19–24; 1 Thess 2:17–3:13 in addition to Phlm 21, 22) and understands
it as one element of the ―apostolic Parousia‖ in which Paul seeks to convey to the readers
the presence of his apostolic authority and power. Mullins (CBQ 35 [1973] 350–58),
however, has argued convincingly that these references to forthcoming visits by Paul
denote a theme at the conclusions of his letters rather than a fixed formula.
    a{ma de; kai; eJtoivmazev moi xenivan. ―At the same time, prepare a guest room for me.‖
On the adverb a{ma, ―at the same time,‖ see on Colossians 4:3. Here it is attached to the
immediately preceding words and signifies: ―at the same time as your kindly action in
connection with Onesimus.‖ xeniva usually denotes ―hospitality‖ or ―entertainment‖ shown
to a guest, but here it refers to the place where the guest is lodged, the ―guest room‖ (Acts
28:23 and Ps-Clem Hom 12:2; see BAG, 547, and note Lightfoot‘s discussion, 343, of the
Greek term and its Latin equivalent).
The ground for (gavr) this request is that Paul hopes ―to be restored to you in answer to
your prayers‖ (ejlpivzw ga;r o{ti dia; tw`n proseucw`n uJmw`n carisqhvsomai uJmi`n). As in
the serious request of Philippians 1:19, so here too the author does not directly ask for their
intercessions (proseuchv designates ―petition for others,‖ i.e. ―intercession‖), but tactfully
takes it for granted that Philemon and those of his household (for the first time since v 3 the
plural ―you,‖ uJmw`n, is used; the change to the plural does not mean that the other members
of the household are aware of the contents of the letter) are remembering him and his
imprisonment constantly in prayer. This further suggests that Philemon‘s household are
concerned not only about Paul‘s personal welfare, centering upon his release from prison,
but also about the important ministry to which he is called and committed (note Wiles,
Prayers, 281–83).
    ejlpivzw … carisqhvsomai uJmi`n. Lit. ―I hope … I will be granted to you.‖ If the verb
ejlpivzw is being used in its normal NT sense of a firm hope or expectation then Paul is
stating he is confident that he will soon be freed from prison (several commentators take it
this way; Wiles, Prayers, 282, states, however, that ―on this occasion, too [sc. as in Phil
1:19, 20], he is not sure of the outcome of his imprisonment: he is hoping to be granted to
them through their prayers‖). How or when this will occur is not known; such a decision
rests entirely in God‘s hands who, it is hoped, will graciously restore Paul to the
community (the Greek is expressive: the verb carisqhvsomai is in the passive indicating it
is only God who can secure Paul‘s release—that is why he is to be petitioned in
prayer—while the basic meaning of the word to ―give freely or graciously as a favor‖ [see
on Col 2:13, and note the parallel in Test Joseph 1:6, ―I was in prison, and the Savior
restored, ejcarivtwse, me,‖ cited by Lohse, 206] draws attention to the gracious nature of
the divine action). Paul‘s hope for his release is not for his own sake but for the benefit of
these Christians at Colossae (this is the significance of the plural uJmi`n, ―for you‖).
    23. In the last two verses of the letter the apostle sends greetings (ajspavzetai: see on
Col 4:10) from his co-workers to Philemon. The list of names, all of which occur in Col
4:10–14, begins with Epaphras who is described as ―my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus‖
(sunaicmavlwtov" mou ejn Cristw`/ ÆIhsou`). At Colossians 4:10 Aristarchus is called a
fellow-prisoner (sunaicmavlwto") of Paul. Although the term could be used in a figurative
sense of one who had been taken captive by Christ and was a co-worker, in both places it is
best understood as a description of a companion who is in prison with the apostle (so
Lohse, 207, Martin, NCB, 169, Stuhlmacher, 55, and Ollrog, Paulus, 76). Here if Paul
simply wanted to call Epaphras his ―coworker‖ the term sunergov" (v 24) would have been
adequate. The presence of the two words in verses 23 and 24 suggests they are to be
distinguished. Epaphras, the founder of the church at Colossae (see on Col 4:12, 13), shares
Paul‘s confinement (note v 1). He is mentioned first since he was a Colossian (Col 4:12)
and as the evangelist of Colossae was no doubt well known to Philemon.
It has been conjectured (E. Amling, ―Eine Konjektur im Philemonbrief,‖ ZNW 10 [1909]
261, 262) that the last two words in the preceding phrase ―in Christ Jesus‖ (ejn Criotw`/
ÆIhsou`") should be separated by a comma so that the latter, ―Jesus,‖ then becomes the
name of the man ―Jesus called Justus‖ referred to in Colossians 4:11. On this view the list
of names mentioned in Colossians 4:10–14 would then correspond with this list in
Philemon 23, 24. It has been argued that if one reads ―in Christ Jesus‖ instead of ―in Christ,
Jesus‖ it is the only place in the letter where the phrase occurs while elsewhere Paul
employs ―in Christ‖ (vv 8, 20) and ―in the Lord‖ (vv 16, 20). But it is precarious to build
too much on the evidence of such a short letter (of 335 words) especially as Paul does write
―for Christ Jesus‖ in verses 1, 9 (Martin, NCB, 169; Stuhlmacher, 55, rightly contends that
to conjecture the omission of the last letter " of ÆIhsou`", ―Jesus,‖ against the manuscript
evidence is neither expedient nor likely; against Zahn whose suggestion is cited with
approval by Lohse, 207, and Ollrog, Paulus, 49).
     24. Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke as Paul‘s fellow-workers also send their
greetings (see on Col 4:10, 14). In contrast to the more complete list in Colossians 4 no
details are given about those mentioned. However, they are styled ―fellow-workers‖
(sunergoiv, see on Col 4:11 and Philem 1) a term already used of Philemon himself. Both
senders and recipient of the greetings were engaged in the task of proclaiming Christ,
having been commissioned by God. They had labored together with Paul in the joint work
of preaching the gospel, especially to Gentiles (cf. Ollrog, Paulus, 63–72; regarding the
subject of Paul and his co-workers see 272, 273).
25. On the closing benediction, which was a regular and consistent element at the end of
Paul‘s letters, see the comments on Colossians 4:18. As in its Colossian counterpart so here
too the final benediction picks up the introductory greeting (v 3). Paul desires that
Philemon and his ―house community‖ (the plural uJmw`n, ―your,‖ here corresponds to the
uJmi`n, ―to you,‖ of v 3) may apprehend more fully ―the grace of the (or ‗our,‘ see the note
above 304) Lord Jesus Christ.‖ At the same time the benediction strikes a note of
confidence indicating that Christ‘s grace will remain with this house congregation. In place
of the simple meq j uJmw`n (―with you‖) the fuller expression meta; tou` pneuvmato" uJmw`n
(―with your spirit‖) occurs, as in Galatians 6:18 and Philippians 4:23. pneu`ma (―spirit‖) is
found with an anthropological significance so that there is no difference in meaning
between this phrase and the shorter ―with you‖ (Schweizer, TDNT 6, 435).

Explanation
    Paul closes his letter to Philemon with some final remarks and greetings. He has already
interceded for his dear friend regarding his understanding and generosity (v 6), a generosity
he trusts will be demonstrated toward Onesimus. Such an intercession is, in effect, a
petition for a deeper understanding of God‘s will and the performance of it in love. Paul
now expresses his confidence that Philemon will be obedient to that will of God and do
even more than he has been requested, which was to receive Onesimus as a beloved
brother, even as Paul himself. What this ―more‖ is the author does not tell us, but it is just
possible he is expressing the desire for Onesimus to be returned to him for the service of
the gospel. Paul hopes to come in person and visit Philemon and if this occurs it will be
because God has graciously answered the prayers of this house church. The announcement
of this hope gives a certain emphasis to his intercession for Onesimus as it will enable him
to see for himself as to how things have gone.
The apostle sends greetings to Philemon from five of his co-workers and then closes with a
benediction that Christ‘s grace might remain with the members of this house church.
Bibliography

A. TEXTS, COMMENTARIES AND REFERENCE WORKS
(COMMENTARIES ARE CITED BY REFERRING TO THE AUTHOR‘S NAME AND PAGE NUMBER)
Abbott, T. K. The Epistles to the Ephesians and to the Colossians. ICC. Edinburgh: Clark,
   1897.
Aland, K., Black, M., Martini, C. M., Metzger, B. M. and Wikgren, A. ed. The Greek New
   Testament. 3rd ed. New York: United Bible Societies, 1975.
Bauer, W. A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian
   Literature. Tr and ed. from 5th German ed. Arndt, W. F. and Gingrich, F. W. 2nd ed.
   revised and augmented by F. W. Gingrich and Danker, F. W. Chicago: University
   Press, 1979.
Beare, F. W. The Epistle to the Colossians. IB 11. New York and Nashville: Abingdon,
   1955.
Bengel, J. A. New Testament Word Studies. Vol. 2. Tr Lewis, C. T. and Vincent, M. R.
   Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 1971.
Benoit, P. Les Epîtres de Saint Paul aux Philippiens, aux Colossiens, à Philémon, aux
   Ephésiens. La Sainte Bible. Paris: Editions du Cerf, 1949.
Blass, F. and Debrunner, A. A Greek Grammar of the New Testament and Other Early
   Christian Literature. Tr and rev. from the 9th–10th German edition by Funk, R. W.
   Chicago: University Press, 1961.
Bratcher, R. G. and Nida, E. A. A Translator‘s Handbook on Paul‘s Letters to the
   Colossians and to Philemon. Stuttgart: United Bible Societies, 1977.
Brown, C. ed. The New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology. 3 vols.
   Exeter: Paternoster, 1975–78. American edition Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
   1975–78.
Bruce, F. F. in Simpson, E. K., and Bruce, F. F. Commentary on the Epistles to the
   Ephesians and the Colossians. NICNT. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1957.
Burton, E. de W. Syntax of the Moods and Tenses in New Testament Greek. 3rd ed.
   Edinburgh: Clark, 1898.
Caird, G. B. Paul‘s Letters from Prison (Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Philemon) in
   the Revised Standard Version. London and New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Carson, H. M. Colossians and Philemon. TNTC. London: Tyndale, 1960.
Conzelmann, H. Die kleineren Briefe des Apostels Paulus. Der Brief an die Kolosser. NTD
   8. 10th ed. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1965.
Dibelius, M. An die Kolosser, Epheser an Philemon. HNT 12. 3rd ed. rev. by Greeven, H.
   Tübingen: Mohr, 1953.
Ernst, J. Die Briefe an die Philipper, an Philemon, an die Kolosser, an die Epheser. RNT.
   Regensburg: Pustet, 1974.
Field, F. Notes on the Translation of the New Testament. Cambridge: University Press,
    1899.
Friedrich, G. Die kleineren Briefe des Apostels Paulus. Der Brief an Philemon. NTD 8. 10th
    ed. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1965.
Haupt, E. Die Gefangenschaftsbriefe. MeyerK 8–9. 8th ed.. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
   1902.
Kittel, G. and Friedrich, G. ed(s). Theologncal Dictionary of the New Testament. 10 vols. Tr
    Bromiley, G. W. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1964–76.
Lightfoot, J. B. Saint Paul‘s Epistles to the Colossians and to Philemon. 9th ed. London:
   Macmillan, 1890.
Lohmeyer, E. Die Briefe an die Philipper, Kolosser und an Philemon. MeyerK 9. 13th ed.
   Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1964.
Lohse, E. Colossians and Philemon. Tr Poehlmann, W. R., and Karris, R. J. from 14th
   German ed. Hermeneia. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1971.
Martin, R. P. Colossians: The Church‘s Lord and the Christian‘s Liberty. Exeter:
   Paternoster, 1972. (reprint) Palm Springs, CA: R. N. Haynes Publ. Co. 1982.
———. Colossians and Philemon. NCB. 3rd ed.. London: Oliphants, 1981. Grand Rapids,
 MI: Eerdmans.
Masson, C. L‘Epître aux Colossiens. CNT 10. Paris: Delachaux et Niestlé, 1950.
Metzger, B. M. A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament. London and New
   York: United Bible Societies, 1971.
Meyer, H. A. W. Critical and Exegetical Handbook to the Epistles to the Philippians and
  Colossians. Tr Dickson, W. P. New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1875.
Moule, C. F. D. An Idiom Book of New Testament Greek. Cambridge: University Press,
  1953.
———. The Epistles of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians and to Philemon. Cambridge:
 University Press, 1962.
Moulton, J. H. A Grammar of New Testament Greek. Vol. 1. Prolegomena. 3rd ed.
  Edinburgh: Clark, 1908.
Moulton, J. H. and Howard, W. F. A Grammar of New Testament Greek. Vol. 2. Accidence
  and Word-Formation. Edinburgh: Clark, 1929.
Moulton, J. H. and Milligan, G. The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament. London: Hodder,
  1930.
Müller, J. J. The Epistles of Paul to the Philippians and to Philemon. NICNT. Grand Rapids,
  MI: Eerdmans, 1955.
Nestle, E. and Aland, K. Novum Testamentum Graece. 26th ed. Aland, K., Black, M.,
   Martini, C. M., Metzger, B. M., Wikgren, A. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelstiftung, 1979.
Radford, L. B. The Epistle to the Colossians and the Epistle to Philemon. WC London:
Methuen, 1931.
Robertson, A. T. A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical
   Research. 4th ed. Nashville: Broadman, 1923.
Schlatter, A. Der Brief an Philemon: Erläuterungen zum Neuen Testament 2, Stuttgart:
   Calwer Verlag, 1909, 861–66.
Schmauch, W. Beiheft to Lohmeyer, E. Die Briefe an die Philipper, Kolosser und an
   Philemon. MeyerK 9. 13th ed. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1964.
Schweizer, E. Der Brief an die Kolosser. EKKNT. Zurich: Benziger, 1976.
Scott, E. F. The Epistles of Paul to the Colossians, to Philemon and to the Ephesians.
   MNTC. London: Hodder, 1930.
Stuhlmacher, P. Der Brief an Philemon. EKKNT. Zürich: Bensiger, 1975.
Thrall, M. E. Greek Particles in the New Testament. Linguistic and Exegetical Studies.
   NTTS 3. Leiden: Brill, 1962.
Turner, N. Syntax of J. H. Moulton, A Grammar of New Testament Greek. Vol. 3.
   Edinburgh: Clark, 1963.
Vincent, M. R. The Epistles to the Philippians and to Philemon. ICC. Edinburgh: Clark,
   1897.
von Soden, H. Die Briefe an die Kolosser, Epheser, Philemon; die Pastoralbriefe.
   Hand-Commentar zum Neuen Testament 3,1. 2nd ed. Leipzig: 1893.
Williams, A. L. The Epistles of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians and to Philemon. The
   Cambridge Greek Testament for Schools and Colleges. Cambridge: University Press,
   1907.
Zerwick, M. Biblical Greek. Tr Smith, J. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1963.



B. STUDIES, ARTICLES, ETC RELATING TO COLOSSIANS
Agnew, F. ―On the Origin of the Term Apostolos.‖ CBQ 38 (1976) 49–53.
Aletti, J. N. Colossiens, 1, 15–20. Genre et exégèse du texte Fonction de la thématique
   sapientelle. AnBib 91. Rome: Biblical Institute. 1981.
Anderson, C. P. ―Who Wrote ‗the Epistle from Laodicea‘?‖ JBL 85 (1966) 436–40.
Asting, R. Die Verkündigung des Wortes ira Urchristentum. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1939.
Austgen, R. J. Natural Motivation in the Pauline Epistles. 2nd ed.. Notre Dame: University
   Press, 1969.
Bacchiocchi, S. From Sabbath to Sunday. A Historical Investigation of the Rise of Sunday
   Observance in Early Christianity. Rome: Pontifical Gregorian University, 1977.
Bammel, E. ―Versuch zu Col 1:15–20.‖ ZNW 52 (1961) 88–95.
Bandstra, A. J. ―Did the Colossian Errorists Need a Mediator?‖ New Dimensions in grew
   Testament Study, ed. Longenecker, R. N. and Tenney, M. C. Grand Rapids, MI:
   Zondervan, 1974, 329–43.
———. The Law and the Elements of the World. An Exegetical Study in Aspects of Paul‘s
 Teaching. Kampen: Kok, 1964. American edition, Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.
Banks, R. J. Paul‘s Idea of Community. The Early House Churches in Their Historical
   Setting. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1980.
Barrett, C. K. From First Adam to Last. A Study in Pauline Theology. New York:
   Scribner‘s, 1962.
Barth, M. Ephesians. Translation and Commentary on Chapters 1–6. AB 34, 34A. Garden
   City, NY: Doubleday, 1974.
Bauckham, R. J. ―Colossians 1:24 Again: The Apocalyptic Motif.‖ EvQ 47 (1975) 168–70.
B aumert, N. Täglich sterben und auferstehen. Der Literalsinn von 2 Kor 4,12–5,10. SANT
   84. Munich: Kösel, 1973.
Beasley-Murray, G. R. Baptism in the New Testament. London: Macmillan, 1962.
———. ―The Second Chapter of Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 469–79.
Bedale, S. ―The Meaning of kefalhv in the Pauline Epistles.‖ JTS 5 (1954) 211–15.
Benoit, P. ―Corps, tête et plérôme dans les épîtres de la captivité.‖ RB 63 (1956) 5–44.
———. ―L‘hymne christologique de Col 1, 15–20. Jugement critique sur l‘état des
 recherches.‖ Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-Roman Cults. Studies for Morton
 Smith at Sixty, ed. Neusner, J. Part One. New Testament. SJLA 12. Leiden: Brill, 1975,
 226–63.
———. ―Qumran and the New Testament.‖ Paul and Qumran. Studies in New Testament
 Exegesis, ed. Murphy-O‘Connor, J. London: Chapman, 1968, 1–30.
Berger, K. ―Apostelbrief und apostolische Rede/Zum Formular frühchristlicher Briefe.‖
   ZNW 65 (1974) 190–231.
———. ―Die sogenannten ‗Sätze heiligen Rechts‘ im Neuen Testament. Ihre Funktion und
   ihr Sitz im Leben.‖ TZ 28 (1972) 305–330.
Best, E. A Historical Study of the Exegesis of Col 2, 14. Rome: unpublished thesis, 1956.
———. One Body in Christ. A Study in the Relationship of the Church to Christ in the
 Epistles of the Apostle Paul. London: SPCK, 1955.
Betz, O. ―Felsenmann und Felsengemeinde ( Eine Parallele zu Mt. 16: 17–19 in den
   Qumranpsalmen). ‖ ZNW 48 (1957) 49–77.
Beyer, K. Semitische Syntax ira Neuen Testament. SUNT 1. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und
   Ruprecht, 1962.
Bieder, W. Die Berufung im Neuen Testament. ATANT 38. Zürich: Zwingli, 1961.
Biser, E. ―Die Idee des Friedens nach den paulinischen Gefangenschaftsbriefen.‖ GuL 27
   (1954) 165–70.
Bjerkelund, C. J. Parakalô. Form, Funktion und Sinn der parakalô-Sätze in den
   paulinischen Briefe. Bibliotheca Theologica Norwegica 1. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget,
   1967.
Black, M. The Scrolls and Christian Origins. New York: Scribner‘s, 1961.
Blanchette, O. A. ―Does the Cheirographon of Col 2:14 Represent Christ himself?‖ CBQ 23
(1961) 306–312.
Blinzler, J. ―Lexikalisches zu dem Terminus ra ta; stoicei`n tou` kovsmou bei Paulus.‖
    Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus lnternationalis Catholicus. 2 vols. Rome: Pontifical
    Biblical Institute, 1963, 2. 429–43.
Bornkamm, G. ―Baptism and New Life in Paul. Romans 6.‖ Early Christian Experience. Tr
   Hammer, P. L. London: SCM, 1969, 71–86. American edition, New York: Harper and
   Row, 1969.
———. ―Die Hoffnung im Kolosserbrief. Zugleich ein Beitrag zur Frage der Echtheit des
 Briefes.‖ Studien zum Neuen Testament und zur Patristik. Erich Klostermann zum 90.
 Geburtstag dargebracht. TU 77. Berlin: Akademie, 1961, 56–64. Reprinted in
 Geschichte und Glaube 2. Gesammelte Aufsätze. Vol. 4. BEvT 53. Munich: Kaiser,
 1971, 206–213.
———. Studien zu Antike und Urchristentum. Gesammelte Aufsätze. Vol. 2. BEvT 28.
 Munich: Kaiser, 1959.
———. ―The Heresy of Colossians.‖ Conflict at Colossae, ed. Francis, F. O. and Meeks,
 W. A. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1975, 123–45. Originally
 published as ―Die Häresie des Kolosserbriefs.‖ TLZ 73 (1948) 11–20.
Bouttier, M. ―Complexio Oppositorum: sur les Formules de 1 Cor. xii. 13; Gal. iii. 26–8;
   Col. iii. 10, 11.‖ NTS 23 (1976–77) 1–19.
———. ―Remarques sur la conscience apostolique de St. Paul.‖ OIKONOMIA.
   Heilsgeschichte als Thema der Theologie, ed. Christ, F. Hamburg-Bergstedt: Reich,
   1967, 100–108.
Bowen, C. R. ―Are Paul‘s prison letters from Ephesus?‖ AJT 24 (1920) 112–35, 277–87.
———. ―The Original Form of Paul‘s Letter to the Colossians.‖ JBL 43 (1924) 177–206.
Bowers, W. P. ―A Note on Colossians 1:27a.‖ Current Issues in Biblical and Patristic
  Interpretation. Studies in Honor of Merrill C. Tenney Presented by His Former
  Students, ed. Hawthorne, G. F. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1975, 110–14.
Bradley, J. ―The Religious Life-Setting of the Epistle to the Colossians.‖ StBibT 2 (1972)
   17–36.
Brown, R. E. The Semitic Background of the Term ―Mystery‖ in the New Testament. FBBS
   21. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1968.
Bruce, F. F. Paul. Apostle of the Free Spirit. Exeter: Paternoster, 1977. American edition,
   Paul. Apostle of the Heart Set Free. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1977.
———. Tradition Old and New. Exeter: Paternoster, 1970. American edition Grand
 Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1970.
Bujard, W. Stilanalytische Untersuchungen zum Kolosserbrief als Beitrag zur Methodik
   von Sprachvergleichen. SUNT 11. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1973.
Bultmann, R. Theology of the New Testament. Vol. 1. Tr K. Grobel, London: SCM, 1952.
   American edition NY: Scribner‘s, 1952ú
Burger, C. Schöpfung und Versöhnung. Studien zum liturgischen Gut im Kolosser- und
   Epheserbrief. WMANT 46. Neukirchen: Neukirchener, 1975.
Burney, C. F. ―Christ as the APXH of Creation.‖ JTS 27 (1926) 160–77.
Caragounis, C. C. The Ephesian Mysterion. Meaning and Content. ConB, New Testament
   Series 8. Lund: Gleerup, 1977.
Carr, W. ―Two Notes on Colossians.‖ JTS 24 (1973) 492–500.
Cerfaux, L. Christ in the Theology of St. Paul. Tr. G. Webb and A. Walker. New York:
   Herder, 1959.
———. The Church in the Theology of St. Paul. Tr G. Webb and A. Walker. New York:
 Herder, 1959.
Chadwick, H. ―St. Paul and Philo of Alexandriaú‖ BJRL 48 (1965–66) 286–307.
Champion, L. G. Benedictions and Doxologies in the Epistles of Paul. Oxford: published
   privately, 1934.
Clark, K. W. ―The Meaning of ejnergevw and katergevw in the New Testament.‖ JBL 54
   (1935) 93–101.
Crouch, J. The Origin and Intention of the Colossian Haustafel. FRLANT 109. Göttingen:
   Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1972.
Cullmann, O. Early Chrutian Worship. Tr Todd, A. Stewart and Torrance, J. B. SBT 10.
   London: SCM, 1953.
———. The Christology of the New Testament. Tr Guthrie, S. C. and Hall, C. A. M. 2nd
 ed. London: SCM, 1963. 1st American edition Philadelphia: Westminster, 1959.
———. ―The Tradition.‖ The Early Church, ed. Higgins, A. J. B. London: SCM, 1956,
 59–99.
da Castel, T. ―Sunaicmavlwto": Compagno di Prigionia o Conquistato Assieme?‖
   Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus Internationalis Catholicus. 2 vols. Rome: Pontifical
   Biblical Institute, 1963, 2. 417–28.
Dahl, N. A. ―Anamnesis. Mémoire et Commémoration dans le Christianisme primitif.‖ ST 1
    (1948) 69–95.
———. ―Form-Critical Observations on Early Christian Preaching.‖ Jesus in the Memory
of the Early Church. Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1976, 30–36.
     Daniélou, J. ―La Session à la droite du Père.‖ Studia Evangelica, ed. Aland, K. and
others. TU 73. Berlin: Akademie, 1959, 689–98.
     Daube, D. ―Participle and Imperative in 1 Peter.‖ In Selwyn, E. G. The First Epistle of
St Peter. London: Macmillan, 1947, 467–88.
     Davies, W. D. Paul and Rabbinic Judaism. Some Rabbinic Elements in Pauline
Theology. 2nd ed. London: SPCK, 1955. 4th American edition. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1980.
     ———. ―Paul and the Dead Sea Scrolls: Flesh and Spirit.‖ The Scrolls and the New
Testament, ed. Stendahl, K. New York: Harper, 1957, 157–82.
     ———. The Gospel and the Land. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974.
     Deichgräber, R. Gotteshymnus und Christushymnus in der frühen Christenreit.
Untersuchungen zu Form, Sprache und Stil der frühchristlichen Hymnen. SUNT 5.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1967ú
Deissmann, A. Bible Studies. Tr Grieve, A. Edinburgh: Clark, 1901.
     ———. Light from the Ancient East. Tr Strachan, L. R. M. New York: Doran, 1927.
Reprinted Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1927.
     ———. Paul. A Study in Social and Religious History. Tr Wilson, W. E. 2nd ed..
London: Hodder, 1926.
     Delling, G. ―Merkmale der Kirche nach den Neuen Testament.‖ NTS 13 (1966–67)
297–316.
     ———. ―Partizipiale Gottesprädikationen in den Briefen des Neuen Testaments.‖ ST 17
(1963) 1–59.
     ———. Worship in the New Testament. Tr Scott, P. London: Darton, Longman &
Todd, 1962.
     Dibelius, M. ―The Isis Initiation in Apuleius and Related Initiatory Rites.‖ Conflict at
Colossae, ed. Francis, F. O. and Meeks, W. A. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s
Press, 1975, 61–121. Originally published as Die lsisweihe bei Apuleius und verwandte
lnitiations-Riten. SHAW. Ph. 8/4. Heidelberg: Winter, 1917.
    Dodd, C. H. New Testament Studies. Manchester: University Press, 1953.
    ———. The Bible and the Greeks. London: Hodder, 1935.
    ———. The Epistle of Paul to the Romans. London: Hodder, 1932.
    Doty, W. G. Letters in Primitive Christianity. Guides to Biblical Scholarship, NT Series.
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1973.
    Du Plessis, P. J. TELEIOS. The Idea of Perfection in the New Testament. Kampen:
Kok, 1959.
    Dumbrell, W. J. The Meaning and Use of Ekklesia in the New Testament with Special
Reference to its Old Testament Background. University of London: Unpublished M.Th.
thesis, 1966.
    Duncan, G. S. St. Paul‘s Ephesian Ministry. A Reconstruction with Special Reference to
the Ephesian Origin of the Imprisonment Epistles. London: Hodder, 1929.
    Dunn, J. D. G. Baptism in the Holy Spirit. London: SCM, 1970. American edition SBT 15
2nd Ser. Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1970.
    ———. Jesus and the Spirit. A Study of the Religious and Charismatic Experience of
Jesus and the First Christians as Reflected in the New Testament. Philadelphia:
Westminster, 1975.
    Dupont, J. Gnosis. La connaissance religieuse dans les épîtres de saint Paul. Paris:
Gabalda, 1949.
    ———. SUN CRISTWI. L‘union avec le Christ suivant saint Paul. Paris: Desclée de
Brouwer, 1952.
    Durham, J. I. ― and the Presence of God.‖ Proclamation and Presence. Old
Testament Essays in honour of Gwynne Henton Davies, ed. Durham, J. I. and Porter, J. R.
London: SCM, 1970, 272–93. American edition Richmond, VA: John Knox.
    Easton, B. S. ―New Testament Ethical Lists.‖ JBL 51 (1932) 1–12.
    Egan, R. B. ―Lexical Evidence on Two Pauline Passages.‖ NovT 19 (1977) 34–62.
    Eitrem, S. ―EMBATEUW. Note sure Col 2, 18.‖ ST 2 (1948) 90–94.
    Ellis, E. E. ―Paul and his Co-Workers.‖ NTS 17 (1970–71) 437–52. Reprinted in
Prophecy and Hermeneutic in Early Christianity. New Testament Essays. WUNT 18.
Tübingen: Mohr, 1978, 3–22.
    ———. ― ‗Spiritual‘ Gifts in the Pauline Community.‖ NTS 20 (1974) 128–44.
Reprinted in Prophecy, 23–44.
    ———. ―The Circumcision Party and the Early Christian Mission.‖ Prophecy, 116–28.
(Published in an earlier form as ― ‗Those of the Circumcision‘ and the early Christian
Mission.‖ SE 4 [1968]: 390–99).
    ———. The Gospel of Luke. NCB. London: Nelson, 1966.
    Ernst, J. Pleroma und Pleroma Christi. Geschichte und Deutung eines Begriffs der
paulinischen Antilegomena. BU 5. Regensburg: Pustet, 1970.
    Feuillet, A. Le Christ sagesse de Dieu d‘après les épîtres pauliniennes. Paris: Gabalda,
1966.
    Foerster, W. ―Die Irrlehrer des Kolosserbriefes.‖ Studia Biblica et Semitica. Prof. Th. C
Vriezen dedicata. Wageningen: Veenman & Zonen, 1966, 71–80.
    Francis, F. O. ―Humility and Angelic Worship in Col 2:18.‖ Conflict at Colossae, ed.
Francis, F. O. and Meeks, W. A. 2nd ed. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholar‘s Press, 1975,
163–95. Originally published in ST 16 (1963) 109–134.
    ———. ―The Background of EMBATEUEIN (Col 2:18) in Legal Papyri and Oracle
Inscriptions.‖ ibid. 197–207.
    Fridrichsen, A. ―Charité et perfection. Observation sur Col 3, 14.‖ SO 19 (1939) 41–45.
    ———. ―QELWN Col 2:18.‖ ZNW 21 (1922) 135–37.
    Friedrich, G. ―Lohmeyers These über das paulinische Briefpräskript kritisch
beleuchtet.‖ ZNW 46 (1955) 272–74 and TLZ 81 (1956) 343–46.
    Gabathuler, H. J. Jesus Christus. Haupt der Kirche—Haupt der Welt. Der
Christushymnus Colosser 1, 15–20 in der theologischen Forschung der letzten 130 Jahre.
ATANT 45. Zurich: Zwingli, 1965.
    Gärtner, B. The Temple and the Community in Qumran and the New Testament.
SNTSMS 1. Cambridge: University Press, 1965.
    Gaffin, R. B. The Centrality of the Resurrection. A Study in Paul‘s Soteriology. Grand
Rapids, MI: Baker, 1978.
    Gamble, Jr., H. The Textual History of the Letter to the Romans. SD 42. Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, 1977.
    Gibbs, J. G. Creation and Redemption. A Study in Pauline Theology. NovTSup 26.
Leiden: Brill, 1971.
    Gnilka, J. Der Philipperbrief. HTKNT 10/3. Freiburg: Herder, 1968.
    Goppelt, L. ―Jesus und die 1‗Haustafel‘—Tradition.‖ Orienterung an Jesus. Zur
Theologie der Synoptiker. Für Josef Scrmid, ed. Hoffmann, P. with Brox, N. and Pesch, W.
Freiburg: Herder, 1973, 93–106.
    Gourges, M. A la droite de Dieu. Paris: Gabalda, 1978.
    Grabner-Haider, A. Paraklese und Eschatologie bei Paulus. Mensch und Welt im
Anspruch der Zukunft Gottes. NTAbh, NS 4. Münster: Aschendorff, 1968.
Grässer, E. ―Kol 3, 1–4 als Beispiel einer Interpretation secundum homines recipientes.‖
ZTK 64 (1967) 139–68.
    Greeven, H. Gebet und Eschatologie im Neuen Testament. Gütersloh: Bertelsmann,
1931.
    ———. ―Zu den Aussagen des Neuen Testaments üiber die Ehe.‖ ZEE 1 (1957)
109–125.
    Gundry, R. H.  in Biblical Theology with Emphasis on Pauline Anthropology.
SNTSMS 29. Cambridge: University Press, 1976.
    Gunther, J. J. Paul: Messenger and Exile. A Study in the Chronology of His Life and
Letters. Valley Forge: Judson, 1972.
    ———. St. Paul‘s Opponents and Their Background. A Study of Apocalyptic and
Jewish Sectarian Teachings. NovTSup 35. Leiden: Brill, 1973.
    Guthrie, D. New Testament Introduction. The Pauline Epistles. London: Tyndale, 1961.
    Hahn, F. ―Der Apostolat im Urchristentum. Seine Eigenart und seine
Voraussetzungen.‖ KD 20 (1974) 54– 77.
    ———. Mission in the New Testament. Tr Clarke, F. London: SCM, 1965. American
edition SBT 47; Naperville, Il: Allenson, 1965.
    Hall, B. G. ―Colossians II. 23.‖ ExpTim 36 (1924–25) 285.
    Halter, H. Taufe und Ethos. Paulinische Kriterien für das Proprium christliche Moral.
Freiburg: Herder, 1977.
    Hamerton-Kelly, R. G. Pre-Existence, Wisdom and the Son of Man. SNTSMS 21.
Cambridge: University Press, 1973.
    Hamman, A. La Prière. I. Le Nouveau Testament. Tournai: Desclée, 1959.
   Hanson, A. T. Studies in Paul‘s Technique and Theology. London: SPCK, 1974.
   Hanssler, B. ―Zu Satzkonstruktion und Aussage in Kol 2, 23.‖ Wort Gottes in der Zeit.
Festschrift für Karl Hermann Schelkle zum 65. Geburtstag, ed. Feld, H. and Nolte, J.
Düsseldorf: Patmos, 1973, 143–48.
   Harder, G. Paulus und das Geber. NTF 1S, 10. Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1936.
   Harnack, A. von. ―Kovpo" (Kopia`n, Oiv Kopiw`nte") im frühchristlichen
Sprachgebrauch.‖ ZNW 27 (1928) 1–10.
Harrison, P. N. ―Onesimus and Philemon.‖ ATR 32 (1950) 268–94.
    Harrisville, R. A. ―The Concept of Newness in the New Testament.‖ JBL 74 (1955)
69–79.
    Hay, D. M. Glory at the Right Hand. Psalm 110 in Early Christianity. SBLMS 18.
Nashville: Abingdon, 1973.
    Hegermann, H. Die Vorstellung vom Schöpfungsmittler im hellenistischen Judentum
und Urchristentum. TU 82. Berlin: Akademie, 1961.
    Hengel, M. Judaism and Hellenism. Studies in their Encounter in Palestine during the
Early Hellenistic Period. 2 vols. Tr Bowden, J. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1974.
    Hester, J. D. Paul‘s Concept of Inheritance. A Contribution to the Understanding of
Heilsgeschichte. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1968.
    Hill, D. Greek Words and Hebrew Meanings. Studies in the Semantics of Soteriological
Terms. SNTSMS 5. Cambridge: University Press, 1967.
    Hinson, E. G. ―The Christian Household in Colossians 3:18–4:1.‖ RevExp 70 (1973)
495–506.
    Hollenbach, B. ―Col ii.23: Which Things lead to the Fulfilment of the Flesh.‖ NTS 25
(1978–79) 254–61.
    Hooker, M.D. ―Philippians 2:6–11.‖ Jesus und Paulus. Festschrift für Werner Georg
Kümmel zum 70. Geburtstag. 2nd ed., ed. Ellis, E. E. and Grässer, E. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1978, 151–64.
    ———. ―Were there False Teachers in Colossae?‖ Christ and Spirit in the New
Testament. Studies in honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. Lindars, B. and Smalley,
S.S. Cambridge: University Press, 1973, 315–31.
    Hunter, A. M. Paul and his Predecessors. 2nd ed. London: SCM, 1961. American
edition. Philadelphia: Westminster.
    Hurley, J. B. Man and Woman in Biblical Perspective. A study in role relationships and
authority. Leicester: Inter-Varsity, 1981.
    Jensen, J. ―Does porneia mean Fornication? A Critique of Bruce Malina.‖ NovT 20
(1978) 161–84.
    Jervell,J. Imago Dei. Gen 1, 26f im Spätjudentum, in der Gnosis und in den
paulinischen Briefen. FRLANT 76. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1960.
    Jewett, P. K. Man as Male and Female: A Study in Sexual Relationships from a
Theological Point of View. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1975.
    Jewett, R. ―The Form and Function of the Homiletic Benediction.‖ ATR 51 (1969)
18–34.
    Johnson, S. E. ―Unsolved Questions about Early Christianity in Anatolia.‖ Studies in
New Testament and Early Christian Literature. Essays in Honor of Allen P. Wikgren, ed.
Aune, D. E. NovTSup 33. Leiden: Brill, 1972, 181–93.
    Kähler, E. Die Frau in den paulinischen Briefen. Zurich/Frankfurt: Gotthelf, 1960.
    ———. ―Zur ‗Unterordnung‘ der Frau im Neuen Testament.‖ ZEE (1959) 1–13.
    Käsemann, E. ―A Primitive Christian Baptismal Liturgy.‖ Essays on New Testament
Themes. Tr Montague, W. J. London: SCM, 1964, 149–68. American edition. SBT 41.
Naperville, II: Allenson, 1964.
    Käsemann, E. ―Sentences of Holy Law in the New Testament.‖ New Testament
Questions of Today. Tr Montague, W. J. London: SCM, 1969, 66–81.
    ———. ―Worship in Everyday Life: a note on Romans 12.‖ New Testament Questions
of Today. Tr Montague, W. J. London: SCM, 1969, 188–95.
    Kamlah, E. Die Form der katalogischen Paränese im Neuen Testament. WUNT 7.
Tübingen: Mohr, 1964.
    ———. ― ‗Upotavssesqai in den neutestamentlichen Haustafeln.‖ Verborum Veritas.
Festschrift für Gustav Stählin zum 70. Geburtstag, ed.. Bocher, O. and Haacker, K.
Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1970, 237–43.
    ———. ―Wie beurteilt Paulus sein Leiden? Ein Beitrag zur Untersuchung seiner
Denkstruktur.‖ ZNW 54 (1963) 217–32.
Karlson, G. ―Formelhaftes in den Paulusbriefen.‖ Eranos 54 (1956) 138–41.
    Kasting, H. Die Anfänge der urchristlichen Mission. Eine historische Untersuchung.
BEvT 55. Munich: Kaiser, 1969.
    Kehl, N. Der Christushymnus im Kolosserbrief. Eine motivgeschichtliche Untersuchung
zu Kol 1, 12–20. SBM I Stuttgart: Katholisches Bibelwerk, 1967.
    ———. ―Erniedrigung und Erhöhung in Qumran und Kolossä.‖ ZKT 91 (1969) 364–94.
    Kerkhoff, R. Das unablässige Gebet. Beiträge zur Lehre vom immerwährenden Beten
im Neuen Testament. Munich: Zink, 1954.
    Kim, S. An Exposition of Paul‘s Gospel in the Light of the Damascus Christophany. An
Investigation into the Origin of Paul‘s Gospel. University of Manchester: Unpublished
Ph.D. thesis, 1977 [now published as The Origin of Paul‘s Gospel. WUNT, 2 Reihe 4.
Tübingen: Mohr, 1981].
    Kirk, J. A. ―Apostleship since Rengstorf: Towards a Synthesis.‖ NTS 21 (1974–75)
249–44.
    Knight, III, G. W. The New Testament Teaching on the Role Relationship of Men and
Women. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1977.
    Knox, W. L. St Paul and the Church of the Gentiles. Cambridge: University Press,
1939.
    Kramer, W. Christ, Lord, Son of God. Tr B. Hardy. SBT 50. London: SCM, 1966.
    Kremer, J. Was an den Leiden Christi noch mangelt. Eine interpretationsgeschichtliche
und exegetische Untersuchung zu Kol. 1, 24b. BBB 12. Bonn: Hanstein, 1956.
    Kümmel, W. G. Introduction to the New Testament. Tr Kee, H. C. 2nd ed. London:
SCM, 1975. 17th American edition, Nashville, TN: Abingdon, 1975.
    ———. The New Testament. The History of the Invesitgation of its Problems. Tr
Gilmour, S. McLean, and Kee, H. C. London: SCM, 1972. American edition Nashville, TN:
Abingdon, 1972.
    Kuhn, H.-W. Enderwartung und gegenwärtiges Heil. Untersuchungen zu den
Gemeindeliedern von Qumran. SUNT 4. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1966.
    Ladd, G. E. ―Paul‘s Friends in Colossians 4:7–16.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 507–514.
    Lähnemann, J. Der Kolosserbrief. Komposition, Situation und Argumentation. SNT 3.
Gütersloh: Mohn, 1971.
    Larsson, E. Christus als Vorbild. Eine Untersuchung zu den paulinischen Tauf- und
Eikontexten. ASNU 23. Uppsala: Gleerup, 1962.
    Leaney, A. R. C. ―Colossians ii. 21–23. (The use of prov").‖ ExpTim 64 (1952–53) 92.
    Lightfoot, J. B. The Epistle of Paul to the Galatians. 2nd American reprint edition.
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1957.
    Lillie, W. ―The Pauline House-tables.‖ ExpTim 86 (1974–75) 179–83.
    Lincoln, A. T. ―A Re-Examination of ‗The Heavenlies‘ in Ephesians.‖ NTS 19
(1972–73) 468–83.
    ———. The Heavenly Dimension. Studies in the Role of Heaven in Paul‘s Thought
with Spec al Reference to His Eschatology. University of Cambridge: Unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, 1977 [now published as Paradise Now and Not Yet: Studies in the Role of the
Heavenly Dimension in Paul‘s Thought with Special Reference to Eschatology. SNTSMS
41. Cambridge: University Press, 1981].
    Loader, W. R. G. ―Christ at the right hand—Ps. cx.l in the New Testament.‖ NTS 24
(1977–78) 199–217. Lövestam, E. Spiritual Wakefulness in the New Testament. LUÅ 55/3.
Lund: Gleerup, 1963.
    Lohmeyer, E. ―Probleme paulinischer Theologie. I. Briefliche Grussüberschriften.‖ ZNW
26 (1927) 158–73.
    Lohse, E. ―Christologie und Ethik im Kolosserbrief.‖ Apophoreta. Festschrift für Ernst
Haenchen, ed. Eltester, W., and Kettler, F. H. BZNW 30. Berlin: Töpelmann, 1964, 157–68.
Reprinted in Die Einheit des Neuen Testaments. Exegetische Studien zur Theologie des
Neuen Testaments. 2nd ed. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1973, 249–61.
    ———. ―Christusherrschaft und Kirche im Kolosserbrief.‖ NTS 11 (1964–65) 203–216.
    ———. ―Die Mitarbeiter des Apostels Paulus im Kolosserbrief.‖ Verborum Veritas.
Festschrift für Gustav Stählin, ed. Bocher, O. and Haacker, K. Wuppertal: Brockhaus,
1970, 189–94.
    ———. ―Ein hymnisches Bekenntnis in Kolosser 2, 13c–15‖ Mélanges Bibliques en
hommage au R. P. Béda Rigaux, ed.. Descamps, A. and Halleux, A. de. Gembloux: Duculot,
1970, 427–35. Reprinted in Einheit, 276–84.
    ———. ―Paränese und Kerygma im 1. Petrusbrief.‖ ZNW 45 (1954) 68–89.
    Lührmann, D. Das Offenbarungsverständnis bei Paulus und in paulinischen
Gemeinden. WMANT 16. Neukirchener-Vluyn: Neukirchener, 1965.
    Lyonnet, S. ―L‘hymne christologique de l‘Epître aux Colossiens et la fête juive du
Nouvel An.‖ RSR 48 (1960) 92–100.
    ———. ―Paul‘s Adversaries in Colossae.‖ Conflict at Colossae, ed. Francis, F. O. and
Meeks, W. A. 2nd ed.. SBLSBS 4. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1975, 147–61. Originally
published as ―L‘étude du milieu littéraire et l‘exégèse de Nouveau Testament: 4. Les
adversaires de Paul à Colosses.‖ Bib 37 (1956) 27–38; cf. also his article ―L‘Epître aux
Colossiens (Col 2:18) et les mystères d‘Apollon Clarien.‖ Bib 43 (1962) 417–35.
    McCown, W. ―The Hymnic Structure of Colossians 1:15–20.‖ EvQ 51 (1979) 156–62.
    McDonald, J. I. H.  and . The articulation and structure of the earliest
Christian message. SNTSMS 37. Cambridge: University Press, 1980.
    Macgregor, G. H. C. ―The Concept of the Wrath of God in the New Testament.‖ NTS 7
(1960–61) 101–109.
    McKelvey, R.J. The New Temple. The Church in the New Testament. OTM 3. Oxford:
University Press, 1969.
   Magie, D. Roman Rule in Asia Minor. 2 vols. Princeton: University Press, 1950.
   Malina, B. ―Does Porneia mean Fornication?‖ NovT 14 (1972) 10–17.
Marchel, W. Abba, Père! La prière du Christ et des chrétiens. 2nd ed. AnBib 19A. Rome:
Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1971.
   Marshall, I. H. ―New Wine in Old Wine Skins: V. The Biblical Use of the Word
‗Ekkleµsia‘.‖ ExpTim 84 (1972–73) 359–64.
   ———. ―Palestinian and Hellenistic Christianity: Some Critical Comments.‖ NTS 19
(1972–73) 271–87.
———. ―The Christ-Hymn in Philippians 2:5–11.‖ TB 19 (1968) 104–127.
    Marshall, L. H. The Challenge of New Testament Ethics. London: Macmillan, 1947.
    Martin, R. P. ―An Early Christian Hymn (Col. 1:15–20).‖ EvQ 36 (1964) 195–205.
    ———. ―Approaches to New Testament Exegesis.‖ New Testament Interpretation.
Essays on Principles and Methods, ed. Marshall, I. H. Exeter: Paternoster, 1977. 220–51.
American edition Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1977.
    ———. ―Aspects of Worship in the New Testament Church.‖ Vox Evangelica 2 (1963)
6–32.
    ———. Carmen Christi. Philippians ii. 5–11 in Recent Interpretation in the Setting of
Early Christian Worship. SNTSMS 4. Cambridge: University Press, 1967.
    ———. ―Reconciliation and Forgiveness in Colossians.‖ Reconciliation and Hope.
New Testament Essays on Atonement and Eschatology presented to L. L. Morris on his
60th Birthday, ed. R. Banks. Exeter: Paternoster, 1974, 104–124. American edition, Grand
Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1974.
    ———. The Family and the Fellowship. New Testament Images of the Church. Exeter:
Paternoster, 1979.
    ———. ―Virtue.‖ NIDNTT 3, 928–32.
    ———. Reconciliation: A Study of Paul‘s Theology. London: Marshall, Morgan and
Scott. Atlanta, GA: John Knox, 1981.
    Marxsen, W. Introduction to the New Testament. An Approach to its Problems. Tr
Buswell, G. Oxford: Blackwell‘s, 1968, 177–86. American edition, Philadelphia: Fortress,
1968.
    Megas, G. ―Das ceirovgrafon Adams. Ein Beitrag zu Kol 2:13–15.‖ ZNW 27 (1928)
305–320.
    Merk, O. Handeln aus Glauben. Die Motivierungen der paulinischen Ethik. Marburger
Theologische Studien 5. Marburg: Elwert, 1968.
    Merklein, H. Das kirchliche Amt nach dem Epheserbrief SANT 33. Munich: Kösel,
1973.
    Metzger, B. M. The Text of the New Testament. Its Transmission, Corruption and
Restoration. 2nd ed. New York/London: Oxford University Press, 1968.
    Meyer, H. A. W. Critical and Exegetical Handbook to the Epistle to the Ephesians. Tr
Evans, M.J. and Dickson, W. P. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1884.
    Michaelis, W. Versöhnung des Alls. Dief tore Botschaft von der Gnade Gottes. Bern:
Siloah, 1950.
    Michl, J. ―Die ‗Versöhnung‘ (Kol 1, 20).‖ TQ 128 (1948) 442–62.
    Mitton, C. L. The Epistle to the Ephesians. Its Authorship, Origin and Purpose. Oxford:
University Press, 1951.
     Montague, G. T. Growth in Christ. A Study in Saint Paul‘s Theology of Progress.
Fribourg, Switz: Regina Mundi, 1961.
     Morris, L. The Apostolic Preaching of the Cross. 3rd ed. London: Tyndale, 1965.
     Moule, C. F. D. ―Death ‗to Sin,‘ ‗to Law,‘ and ‗to the World‘: a Note on certain
Datives.‖ Mélanges Bibliques en hommage au R. P. Béda Rigaux, ed. Descamps, A. and de
Halleux, A. Gembloux: Duculot, 1970, 367–75.
     ———. ―Further Reflexions on Philippians 2:5–11.‖ Apostolic History and the Gospel.
Biblical and Historical Essays Presented to F. F. Bruce, ed. Gasque, W. W. and Martin, R.
P. Exeter: Paternoster, 1970, 264–76. American edition Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans,
1970.
     ———. ― ‗The New Life‘ in Colossians 3:1–17.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 481–93.
     ———. The Origin of Christology. Cambridge: University Press, 1977.
     Münderlein, G. ―Die Erwählung durch das Pleroma. Bemerkungen zu Kol. i.19.‖ NTS 8
(1961–62) 264–76.
     Mullins, T. Y. ―Benediction as a NT Form.‖ AUSS 15 (1977) 59–64.
     ———. ―Disclosure. A Literary Form in the New Testament.‖ NovT 7 (1964) 44–50.
     Munck, J. Paul and the Salvation of Mankind, Tr Clarke, F. London: SCM, 1959.
American edition Richmond, VA: 1959.
     Munn, G. L. ―Introduction to Colossians.‖ SWJT 16 (1973) 9–21.
     Mussner, F. Christus, das All und die Kirche. Studien zur Theologie des Epheserbriefes.
   S
TT 5. Trier: Paulinus, 1955.
     Nauck, W. ―Das ouv`n-paräneticum.‖ ZNW 49 (1958) 134, 135.
     ———. ―Salt as a Metaphor in Instructions for Discipleship.‖ ST 6 (1952) 165–78.
     Nock, A. D. ―The Vocabulary of the New Testament.‖ JBL 52 (1933) 131–39.
     Norden, E. Agnostos Theos. Untersuchungen zur Formengeschichte religiöser Rede.
4th ed. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1956.
     O‘Brien, P. T. ―Col. 1:20 and the Reconciliation of All Things.‖ RTR 33 (1974) 45–53.
     ———. Introductory Thanksgivings in the Letters of Paul. NovTSup 49. Leiden: Brill,
1977.
     ———. ―Thanksgiving and the Gospel in Paul.‖ NTS 21 (1974–75) 144–55.
     ———. ―Thanksgiving within the Structure of Pauline Theology.‖ Pauline Studies in
Honour of Professor F. F. Bruce, ed. Hagner, D. A. and Harris, M. J. Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans, 1980, 50–66.
     Ogg, G. The Chronology of the Life of Paul. London: Epworth, 1968. American edition,
The Odyssey of Paul. Old Tappan, NJ: Revell.
     Ollrog, W. H. Paulus und seine Mitarbeiter. Untersuchungen zu Theorie und Praxis der
paulinischen Mission. WMANT 50. Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener, 1979.
O‘Neill, J. C. ―The Source of the Christology in Colossians.‖ NTS 26 (1979–80) 87–100.
     Overfield, P. D. ―Pleroma: A Study in Content and Context.‖ NTS 25 (1978–79)
384–96.
     Percy, E. Die Probleme der Kolosser– und Epheserbriefe. SHVL 39. Lund: Gleerup,
1946.
     Pfitzner, V. C. Paul and the Agon Motif NovTSup 16. Leiden: Brill, 1967.
     Pöhlmann, W. ―Die hymnischen All-Prädikationen in Kol 1:15–20.‖ ZNW 64 (1973)
53–74.
     Polhill, J. B. ―The Relationship Between Ephesians and Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973)
439–50.
    Pope, R. M. ―Studies in Pauline Vocabulary Of Redeeming the Time.‖ ExpTim 22
(1910–11) 522–54.
    Ramsay, W. M. The Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia. Vol. 1. Oxford: University Press,
1895.
    Reicke, B. ―Caesarea, Rome and the Captivity Epistles.‖ Apostolic History and the
Gospel. Biblical and Historical Essays presented to F. F. Bruce on his 60th Birthday, ed.
Gasque, W. W. and Martin, R. P. Exeter: Paternoster, 1970, 277–86. American edition,
Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1970.
    ———. ―The Historical Setting of Colossians.‖ RevExp 70 (1973) 429–38.
    ———. ―Zum sprachlichen Verständnis vom Kol 2, 23.‖ ST 6 (1952) 39–53.
    Reitzenstein, R. Hellenistic Mystery-Religions. Their Basic Ideas and Signficance. Tr
Steely, J. E. Pittsburg: Pickwick, 1978.
    Rengstorf, K. H. ―Die neutestamentliche Mahnungen an die Frau, sich dem Manne
unterzuordnen.‖ Verbum Dei manet in Aeternum. Festschrift für O. Schmitz, ed. Foerster,
W. Witten: Luther, 1953, 131–45.
    Reumann,J. ―OIKONOMIA—Terms in Paul in Comparison with Lucan
Heilsgeschichte. ‖NTS 13 (1966–67) 147–67.
    Robinson, D. W. B. ―Who Were the Saints?‖ RTR (1963) 45–53.
    Robinson, J. A. St Paul‘s Epistle to the Ephesians. 2nd ed.. London: Macmillan, 1909.
American edition Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 1979.
    Robinson, J. A. T. The Body. A Study in Pauline Theology. SBT 5. London: SCM, 1952.
    Robinson, J. M. ―A Formal Analysis of Colossians 1:15–20.‖ JBL 76 (1957) 270–87.
    Roels, E. D. God‘s Mission. The Epistle to the Ephesians in Mission Perspective.
Franeker: Wever, 1962.
    Roller, O. Das Formular der paulinischen Briefe. Ein Beitrag zur Lehre vom antiken
Briefe. BWANT 4S, 6. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1933.
    Rutherford, J. ―St. Paul‘s Epistle to the Laodiceans.‖ ExpTim 19 (1907–08) 311–14.
    Sampley, J. P. ―And the Two Shall Become One Flesh.‖ A Study of Traditions in
Ephesians 5:21–33. SNTSMS 16. Cambridge: University Press, 1971.
    Sanders, J. T. The New Testament Christological Hymns. Their Historical Religious
Background. SNTSMS 15. Cambridge: University Press, 1971.
    ———. ―The Transition from Opening Epistolary Thanksgiving to Body in the Letters
of the Pauline Corpus.‖ JBL 81 (1962) 348–62.
    Satake, A. ―Apostolat und Gnade bei Paulus.‖ NTS 15 (1968–69) 96–107.
    Schenk, W. Der Segen im Neuen Testament. Eine begriffsanalytische Studie. ThA 25.
Berlin: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt. 1967.
    Schenke, H. M. ―Der Widerstreit gnostischer und kirchlicher Christologie im Spiegel
des Kolosserbriefes.‖ ZTK 61 (1964) 391–403.
    Schille, G. Frühchristliche Hymnen. 2nd ed. Berlin: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, 1965.
Schlier, H. Principalities and Powers in the New Testament. Questiones Disputatae 3.
Freiburg: Herder, 1961.
   Schnackenburg, R. Baptism in the Thought of St. Paul. A Study in Pauline Theology. Tr
Beasley-Murray, G. R. New York: Herder, 1964.
   ———. ―Christus, Geist und Gemeinde (Eph. 4:1–16).‖ Christ and Spirit in the New
Testament. Studies in honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. Lindars, B. and Smalley,
S. S. Cambridge: University Press, 1973, 297–313.
    ———. ―Der Neue Mensch—Mitte christlichen Weltverständnisses.‖ Schriften zum
Neuen Testament. Exegese in Fortschritt und Wandel. Munich: Kösel, 1971, 392–413.
    ———. ―Die Aufnahme des Christushymnus durch den Verfasser des Kolosserbriefes.‖
EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1. Neukirchen/Zürich: Neukirchener/Benziger, 1969, 33–50.
    Schrage, W. Die konkreten Einzelgebote in der paulinschen Paränese. Gütersloh:
Mohn, 1961.
    ———. ― ‗Ekklesia‘ und ‗Synagoge.‘ Zum Ursprung des urchristlichen
Kirchenbegriffs.‖ ZTK 60 (1963) 178–202.
    ———. ―Zur Ethik der neutestamentlichen Haustafeln.‖ NTS 21 (1974–75) 1–22.
    Schroeder, D. ―Lists, Ethical.‖ IDBSup, 546, 547.
    Schubert, P. Form and Function of the Pauline Thanksgivings. BZNW 20. Berlin:
Töpelmann, 1939.
    Schütz, J. H. Paul and the Anatomy of Apostolic Authority. SNTSMS 26. Cambridge:
University Press, 1975.
    Schweizer, E. ―Christianity of the Circumcised and Judaism of the Uncircumcised. The
Background of Matthew and Colossians.‖ Jews, Greeks and Christians. Religious Cultures
in Late Antiquity. Essays in Honor of William David Davies, ed. Hamerton-Kelly, R. and
Scroggs, R. Leiden: Brill, 1976, 245–60.
    ———. ―Die ‗Elemente der Welt‘ Gal 4, 3.9; Kol 2, 8.20.‖ Verborum Veritas.
Festschrift für Gustav Stählin zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. Bocher, O. and Haacker, K.
Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1970, 245–59. Reprinted in Beiträge zur Theologie des Neuen
Testaments. Neutestamentliche Aufsätze (1955–1970). Zurich: Zwingli, 1970, 147–63.
    ———. ―Die Kirche als Leib Christi in den paulinischen Antilegomena.‖ TLZ 86 (1961)
241–56. Reprinted in Neotestamentica: Deutsche und englische Aufsätze, 1951–1963.
Zurich: Zwingli, 1963, 293–316.
———. ―Die Sünde in den Gliedern.‖ Abraham Unser Vater. Juden und Christen im
Gespräch über die Bibel. Festschrift für Otto Michel zum 60. Geburtstag, ed. Betz, O.,
Hengel, M. and Schmidt, P. AGSU 5. Leiden: Brill, 1963, 437–39.
    ———. ―Die Weltlichkeit des Neuen Testamentes: die Haustafeln.‖ Beiträge zur
alttestamentlichen Theologie, Festschrift für Walther Zimmerli zum 70. Geburtstag, ed.
Donner, H., Hanhart, R. and Smend, R. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1977,
397–413.
    ———. ―Gottesgerechtigkeit und Lasterkataloge bei Paulus (inkl. Kol und Eph).‖
Rechtfertigung. Festschrift für Ernst Käsemann zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. Friedrich,J.,
Pöhlmann, W. and Stuhlmacher, P. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1976, 461–77.
    ———. ―Kolosser 1, 15–20.‖ EKKNT Vorarbeiten 1. Neukirchen/Zurich:
Neukirchener/Benziger, 1969, 7–31. Reprinted in Beiträge zur Theologie des Neuen
Testaments. Neutestamentliche Aufsätze (1955–1970). Zurich: Zwingli, 1970, 113–45.
    ———. ―Traditional ethical patterns in the Pauline and post-Pauline letters and their
development (lists of vices and house-tables).‖ Text and Interpretation. Studies in the New
Testament presented to Matthew Black, ed. Best, E. and Wilson, R. McL. Cambridge:
University Press, 1979, 195–209.
    ———. ―Zur neueren Forschung am Kolosserbrief (seit 1970).‖ ThBer 5 (1976)
163–91.
    ———. ―Versöhnung des Alls. Kol 1, 20.‖ Jesus Christus in Historie und Theologie.
Neutestamentliche Festschrift für Hans Conzelmann zum 60. Geburtstag, ed. Strecker, G.
Tübingen: Mohr, 1975, 487–501.
    Scott, C. A. A. Christianity according to St Paul. Cambridge: University Press, 1927.
    Scott, R. B. Y. ―Wisdom in Creation: the  of Proverbs viii. 30.‖ VT (1960) 213–23.
    Seeberg, A. Der Katechismus der Urchristenheit. Leipzig: A. Deichertschen, 1903.
Reprinted as TBü 26. Munich: Kaiser, 1966.
    Sevenster, J. N. Paul and Seneca. NovTSup 4. Leiden: Brill, 1961.
    Simon, M. ―The Apostolic Decree and its Setting in the Ancient Church.‖ BJRL 52
(1969–70) 437–60.
    ———. ―The religionsgeschichtliche Schule, fifty years later.‖ RelS 11 (1975) 135–44.
    Smith, W. S. Musical Aspects of the New Testament. Amsterdam: Have, 1962.
    Stanley, D. M. Christ‘s Resurrection in Pauline Soteriology. AnBib 13. Rome:
Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1961.
    Steinmetz, F. J. Protologische Heils-Zuversicht. Die Strukturen des soteriologischen
und christologischen Denkens im Kolosser-und Epheserbrief. FTS 2. Frankfurt: Knecht,
1969.
    Styler, G. M. ―The Basis of Obligation in Paul‘s Christology and Ethics.‖ Christ and
Spirit in the New Testament. In Honour of Charles Francis Digby Moule, ed. Lindars, B.
and Smalley, S. S. Cambridge: University Press, 1973, 175–87.
    Synge, F. C. St. Paul‘s Epistle to the Ephesians. A Theological Commentary. London:
SPCK, 1941.
    Tachau, P. ―Einst‖ und ―Jetzt‖ im Neuen Testament. Beobachtungen zu einem
urchristlichen Predigtschema in der neutestamentlichen Briefliteratur und zu seiner
Vorgeschichte. FRLANT 105. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1972.
    Tannehill, R. C. Dying and Rising with Christ. A Study in Pauline Theology. BZNW 32.
Berlin: Töpelmann, 1967.
    Thüsing, W. Per Christum in Deum. Studien zum Verhältnis von Christozentrik und
Theozentrik in den paulinischen Hauptbriefen. 2nd ed. NTAbh NS, 1. Münster: Aschendorff,
1969.
    Trench, R. C. Synonyms of the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1969 = 1880.
    Trudinger, L. P. ―A Further Brief Note on Colossians 1:24.‖ EvQ 45 (1973) 36–38.
    van der Horst, P. W. ―Observations on a Pauline Expression.‖ NTS 19 (1972–73)
181–87.
    van Roon, A. The Authenticity of Ephesians. NovTSup 39. Tr Prescod-Jokel, S. Leiden:
Brill, 1974.
    van Unnik, W. C. ―Die Rücksicht auf die Reaktion der Nicht-Christen als Motiv in der
altchristlichen Paränese.‖ Judentum, Urchristentum, Kirche. Festschrift für Joachim
Jeremias, ed. Eltester, W. BZNW 26. Berlin: Töpelmann, 1964, 221–34.
    Vawter, B. ―The Colossians Hymn and the Principle of Redaction.‖ CBQ 33 (1971)
62–81.
    Vögtle, A. Das Neue Testament und die Zukunft des Kosmos. Düsseldorf: Patmos,
1970.
    ———. Die Tugend- und Lasterkataloge im Neuen Testament, exegetisch, religions-
und formgeschichtlich untersucht. NTAbh 16. Münster: Aschendorff, 1936.
    Walter, N. ―Die ‗Handschrift in Satzungen‘ Kol 2:14.‖ ZNW 70 (1979) 115–18.
    Wambacq, B. N. ― ‗per eum reconciliare … quae in caelis sunt‘ Col 1, 20.‖ RB 55
(1948) 35–42.
    Wegenast, K. Das Verständnis der Tradition bei Paulus und in den Deuteropaulinen.
WMANT 8. Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener, 1962.
    Weidinger, K. Die Haustafeln: Ein Stück urchristlicher Paränese. UNT. Leipzig: J. C.
Hinrichs, 1928.
    Weiss, H. ―The Law in the Epistle to the Colossians.‖ CBQ 34 (1972) 294–314.
    Wengst, K. Christologische Formeln und Lieder des Urchristentums. 2nd ed. SNT 7.
Gütersloh: Mohn, 1972.
    White, J. L. The Form and Function of the Body of the Greek Letter: A Study of the
Letter-Body in the Non-Literary Papyri and in Paul the Apostle. SBLDS 2. Missoula, MT:
Scholars Press, 1972.
    Wibbing, S. Die Tugend- und Lasterkataloge im Neuen Testament und ihre
Traditionsgeschichte unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Qumran texte. BZNW 25.
Berlin: Töpelmann, 1959.
    Wiederkehr, D. Die Theologie der Berufung in den Paulusbriefen. Studia Friburgensia,
  S
N 36. Freiburg, Schweiz: Universitätsverlag, 1963.
    Wiles, G. P. Paul‘s Intercessory Prayers: The Significance of the Intercessory Prayer
Passages in the Letters of St. Paul. SNTSMS 24. Cambridge: University Press, 1974.
    Williams, A. L. ―The Cult of Angels at Colossae.‖ JTS 10 (1909) 413–38.
    Williamson Jr., L. ―Led in Triumph. Paul‘s Use of .‖ Int 22 (1968) 317–32.
    Williamson, R. Philo and the Epistle to the Hebrews. ALGHJ 4. Leiden: Brill, 1970.
    Wilson, R. McL. Gnosis and the New Testament. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1968.
Windisch, H. Paulus und Christus. Ein biblisch-religionsgeschichtlicher Vergleich.
Leipzig: Heinrich, 1934.
    Witt, R. E. Isis in the Graeco-Roman World. London: Thames & Hudson, 1971.
    Wolter, M. Rechtfertigung und zukünftiges Heil. Untersuchungen zu Röm 5, 1–11.
BZNW 43. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1978.
    Wulf, F. ― ‗Suchet, was droben ist, wo Christus ist, sitzend zur Rechten Gottes!‘ (Kol 3,
1).‖ GuL 41 (1968) 161–64.
    Yamauchi, E. M. ―Sectarian Parallels. Qumran and Colossae.‖ BSac 121 (1964) 141–52.
    Yates, R. ―A Note on Colossians 1:24.‖ EvQ 42 (1970) 88–92.
    Zeilinger, F. Der Erstgeborene der Schöfung. Untersuchungen zur Formalstruktur und
Theologie des Kolosserbriefes. Vienna: Herder, 1974.
———. ―Die Träger der apostolischen Tradition im Kolosserbrief.‖ Jesus in der
Verkündigung der Kirche, ed. Fuchs, A. Freistadt: Plöchl, 1976, 175–90.



C. STUDIES, ARTICLES, ETC RELATING TO PHILEMON
Amling, E. ―Eine Konjektur im Philemonbrief‖. ZNW 10 (1909) 261, 262.
Bahr, G. J. ―The Subscriptions in the Pauline Letters.‖ JBL 87 (1968) 27–41.
Bartchy, S. S. MALLON CPHSAI. First-Century Slavery and the Interpretation of 1
   Corinthians 7:21. SBLDS 11. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1971.
Campbell, J. Y. Three New Testament Studies. Leiden: Brill, 1965.
Funk, R. W. ―The Apostolic Parousia: Form and Significance.‖ Christian History and
   Interpretation. Studies Presented to John Knox, ed. Farmer, W. R. and others.
   Cambridge: University Press, 1967, 249–68.
Gayer, R. Die Stellung des Sklaven in den paulinischen Gemeinden und bei Paulus.
   Zugleich ein sozialgeschichtlich vergleichender Beitrag zur Wertung des Sklaven in der
   Antike. Bern: Lang, 1976.
George, A. R. Communion with God in the New Testament. London: Epworth, 1953.
Goodenough, E. R. ―Paul and Onesimus.‖ HTR 22 (1929) 181–83.
Greeven, H. ―Prüfung der Thesen von J. Knox zum Philemonbrief.‖ TLZ 79 (1954) 373–78.
Hainz, J. Ekklesia. Strukturen paulinischer Gemeinde-Theologie und Gemeinde-Ordnung.
   BU 9. Regensburg: Pustet, 1972.
Jang, L. K. Der Philemonbrief im Zusammenhang mit dem theologischen Denken des
   Apostels Paulus. Bonn: unpublished thesis, 1964.
Jeremias, J. ―Chiasmus in den Paulusbriefen.‖ ZNW 49 (1958) 145–56.
Knox, J. Philemon among the Letters of Paul. 2nd ed. London: Collins, 1960.
Koch, E. W. ―A Cameo of Koinonia. The Letter to Philemon.‖ Int 17 (1963) 183–87.
McDermott, M. ―The Biblical Doctrine of KOINWNIA.‖ BZ 19 (1975) 64–77, 219–33.
Mullins, T. Y. ―Visit Talk in New Testament Letters.‖ CBQ 35 (1973) 350–58.
Panikulam, G.  in the New Testament. A Dynamic Expression of Christian Life.
   AnBib 85. Rome: Biblical Institute, 1979.
Preiss, T. Life in Christ. SBT 13. Tr Knight, H. London: SCM, 1954.
Ridderbos, H. Paul. An Outline of His Theology. Tr DeWitt, J. R. Grand Rapids, MI:
   Eerdmans, 1975.
Schulz, S. Gott ist kein Sklavenhalter. Die Geschichte einer verspäteten Revolution. 1972.
Schweizer, E. ―Zum Sklavenproblem im Neuen Testament.‖ EvT 32 (1972) 502–506.
Seesemann, H. Der Begriff KOINWNIA im Neuen Testament. BZNW 14. Giessen:
   Töpelmann, 1933.
Spicq, C. Agape in the New Testament. Vol. 2. Tr McNamara, M. A. and Richter, M. H. St.
   Louis: Herder, 1965.
Suhl, A. ―Der Philemonbrief als Beispiel paulinischer Paränese‖. Kairos 15 (1973) 267–79.
Sullivan, K. ―Epignosis in the Epistles of St. Paul.‖ Studiorum Paulinorum Congressus
    Internationalis Catholicus. Vol. 2. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1963, 405–416.
van Unnik, W. C. ―The Christian‘s Freedom of Speech in the New Testament.‖ BJRL 44
   (1962) 466–88.
Wendland, P. Die urchristlichen Literaturformen. 3rd ed. Tübingen: Mohr, 1912.
Westermann, W. L. The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity. Philadelphia:
  American Philosophical Society, 1955.
Wickert, U. ―Der Philemonbrief—Privatbrief oder apostolisches Schreiben?‖ ZNW 52
   (1961) 230–38.
Zmijewksi, J. ―Beobachtungen zur Struktur des Philemonbriefes.‖ BibLeb 15 (1974)
273–96.
i


*
   Deceased
N
  IV The New International Version (1978)
N
  T New Testament
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
*
   Deceased
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
S
  HAW Sitzungsberichte heidelbergen Akademie der Wissenschaften
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
S
  T Studia theologica
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  NT Studien zum Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
B
  ib Biblica
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ib Biblica
S
  WJT Southwestern Journal of Theology
S
  HVL Skrifter Utgivna Av Kungl. Humanistika Vetenskapssamfundet i Lund
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
T
  hBer Theologische Berichte
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
   common or correction by a laer hand 1first corrector 2second corrector
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tBibT Studia biblica et theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
T
  hBer Theologische Berichte
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
M
   ek. 
P
  esiq. R. 
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
B
  Sac Bibliotheca Sacra
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
s
  c. scilicet, that is to say or understand
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
NT
    New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
L
   Leningrad Codes of MT (as published in BHS) or , B19a
c
  . circa (about, approximately)
i
 .e. id est, that is
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  JT American Journal of Theology
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  . circa (about, approximately)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
N
  T New Testament
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
N
  TF Neutestamentliche Forschungen
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
N
  T New Testament
A
  USS Andrews University Seminary Studies
B
  WANT Beiträge zur Wissenschaft vom Alten und Neuen Testament (Stuttgart:Kolhammer)
T
  hA Theologische Arbeiten
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
K
  D Kerygma und Dogma
N
  TS New Testament Studies
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
W
   UNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament (Tübingen: Mohr)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  USS Andrews University Seminary Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
N
  T New Testament
A
  USS Andrews University Seminary Studies
N
  T New Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
OT
    Old Testament
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  B Anchor Bible (New York: Doubleday)
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
N
  TS New Testament Studies
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
S
  BLDS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Dissertation Series
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
aa
    There are several variants to the reading tw`/ qew`/ patriv ktl. (―to God the Father …‖). D*
G and Chrysostom insert tw`/ (―the‖) before patriv (―Father‖), while •Æ A 1 y
  and many other authorities insert kaiv (―and‖) instead, thus reading tw`/ qew`/ kai; patri ktl
(―to the God and Father …‖). However, the more difficult reading, tw`/ qew`/ patri; tou`
kurivou hJmw`n jIhsou` Cristou` (―to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ‖), is to be
preferred. The rarity of the phrase argues in its favor and it is the reading from which the
variants can be explained. An expression, quite as unusual, is found in chapter 3:17, tw`/ qew`/
patri, ―to God the Father‖—again in the context of thanksgiving—where the manuscript
evidence is even more decisive, cf. Moule, 48, 49.
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
1
   first person
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
P
  ol. Ignatius, Letter to the Polycarp
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
i
 .e. id est, that is
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
O
  T Old Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  ANT Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  T Studia theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
O
  T Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QSb Appendix B (Blessings) to 1QS
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
c
  f. confer,compare
C
  D Cairo (Genizah text of the) Damascus (Document)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
Philo, Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
S
  pec. Leg. Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  T Studia theologica
O
  T Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
i
 .e. id est, that is
O
  T Old Testament
OT
    Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
1
  QM  (War Scroll) from Qumran
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  sp. expecially
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  JLA Studies in Judaism in Late Antiquity (Leiden: Brill)
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
B
  U Biblische Untersuchungen
A
  TANT Abhandlungen zur Theologie des Alten und Neuen Testaments
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
S
  BM Stuttgarter biblische Monographien
R
  SR Recherches de science religieuse
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
T
  Q Theologische Quartalschrift
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  TR Reformed Theological Review
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  TS New Testament Studies
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
T
  hBer Theologische Berichte
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
S
  NT Studien zum Neuen Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
O
  T Old Testament
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
V
   Vulgate
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
N
  T New Testament
N
  T New Testament
N
  TS New Testament Studies
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
N
  T New Testament
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
JB
    A. Jones (ed.), Jerusalem Bible
JB
    A. Jones (ed.), Jerusalem Bible
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
V
  T Vetus Testamentum
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
Philo, Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
S
  pec. Leg. Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
Philo, Philo, De Legum Allegoriarum
L
  eg. All. Philo, De Legum Allegoriarum
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  TS New Testament Studies
O
  T Old Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  Q Theologische Quartalschrift
R
  B Revue biblique
c
  f. confer,compare
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  TS Trier theologische Studien
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  TR Reformed Theological Review
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
NT
    New Testament
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
L
  ife Life
J
  . W. Josephus, Jewish Wars
LX
    X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
   T New Testament
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
LX
    X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
LX
    X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
NT
    New Testament
N
   T New Testament
i
 .e. id est, that is
NT
     New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
N
   IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
O
   T Old Testament
O
   T Old Testament
O
   T Old Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
a
   a. The more difficult reading, the passive ajpokathllavghte (―you were reconciled‖),
which creates a harsh anacoluthon after uJma`" in verse 21, is followed by some textual
critics. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 622, notes that this reading which is attested by
diversified and early witnesses (B Hilary Ephraem and, in effect, P46 and 33) can account
for the rise of the other readings as attempts to mend the syntax of the sentence (cf.
Lightfoot and Lohmeyer).
On the other hand, Lohse (64) argues that preference ought to be given to ajpokathvllaxen,
the best attested textual reading (a
   A C Dc K vg syr, etc), which was altered at a very early stage to the passive so as to
strengthen the direct address to the community. Clearly the conflicting textual phenomena
are difficult to resolve.
c
  f. confer,compare
A
    Codex Alexandrinus
C
    Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
v
  g Latin Vulgate (as published in Weber‘s edition)
sy
   r Syriac language or text version of the OT, (as published in the Peshitta Insitute edition,
1980)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
s
  c. scilicet, that is to say or understand
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QpHab Pesher on Habakbuk from Qumran Cave 1
s
  c. scilicet, that is to say or understand
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
i
 .e. id est, that is
v
  (v) verse(s)
O
  T Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
O
  TM Oxford Theological Monographs
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
Ign. Ignatius, Letter to the Ephesians
E
  ph. Ignatius, Letter to the Ephesians
Polycarp Polycarp, Letter to the Philippians
P
  hil. Polycarp, Letter to the Philippians
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
v
  (v) verse(s)
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
OT
    Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
s
  c. scilicet, that is to say or understand
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
F
  BBS Facet Books, Biblical Series
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
N
  TS New Testament Studies
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
NT
    New Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
i
 .e. id est, that is
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
JB
    A. Jones (ed.), Jerusalem Bible
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
c
  f. confer,compare
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
l
 it. literally
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
R
  elS Religious Studies
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
i
 .e. id est, that is
NT
    New Testament
i
 .e. id est, that is
R
  TR Reformed Theological Review
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
>
  
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
RSV
     Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
S
  ANT Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
   Abh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
N
  S New Series
O
  T Old Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
P
   Pesher (commentary)
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
i
 .e. id est, that is
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
OT
    Old Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tBibT Studia biblica et theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
LXX
     The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
N
  T New Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QM  (War Scroll) from Qumran
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
n
  .d. no date
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
R
  B Revue biblique
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  Bü Theologische Bücherei (Munich: Kaiser)
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
aa
    Although the reading ejn aujth`/ ejn eujcaristia/ has strong manuscript support [B Dc H K
Byz Lect, some of the versions, etc] it is probably a copyist‘s assimilation to 4:2, while the
alternate reading ejn aujtw`/ is probably a subsequent modification because of the preceding
phrase ejn aujtw`/ejn eujcarisriva appears to have been the original reading; cf. Metzger,
Textual Commentary, 622.
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
H
  eb. Hebrew
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
H
  eb. Hebrew
B
  DF F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NT New Te
          stament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
  eg. De Legatione ad Gaium (Philo)
B
  ell. De Bello Judaico (Josephus)
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
H
  eb. Hebrew
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
m
    masculine
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
i
 .e. id est, that is
NI
   DNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
i
 .e. id est, that is
R
  B Revue biblique
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
RS
   V Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
SB
   T Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NE
   B The New English Bible
TEV
     Today‘s English Version
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
m
   SS manuscript(s)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
m
    masculine
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
O
  T Old Testament
LXX
     The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
RS
   V Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
A
  SNU Acta seminarii neotestamentici upsaliensis
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
I
  nt Interpretation
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
c
  f. confer,compare
I
  nt Interpretation
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  ent. century
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
H
  er Hermathena
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
i
 .e. id est, that is
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
Z
  KT Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie
S
  T Studia theologica
T
  hBer Theologische Berichte
a
   a. The reading a{ (―which‖) is strongly supported by P46 and good representatives of the
Alexandrian and Western types of text (a
*
   A B D* etc). On the insertion of the negative ―not‖ (oujk or mhv) due to a failure to
understand Paul‘s idiom, and on the number of conjectural emendations see the exegetical
comment below.
b
   b. The kaiv (―and‖) was omitted by P46 B 1739 Origenlat and other Fathers, and this is
strong and early external evidence. Accordingly ajfeidiva/ swvmato" is not the third in a
series of datives after ejn (―in‖) but is an instrumental dative (―by severe treatment of the
body‖) qualifying the previous prepositional phrase. On the other hand, the omission may
have been accidental since it is found in a
  A C Dgr H 33 81, etc
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
B
   Codex Vaticanus
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
H
   Holiness Code
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
LXX
     The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
l
 it. literally
O
  T Old Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
O
  T Old Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Philo, Philo, De Confusione Linguarum
C
  onf. Philo, De Confusione Linguarum
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
J
  . W. Josephus, Jewish Wars
l
 it. literally
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
A
   LGHJ Arbeiten zur Literatur und Geschichte des hellenistischen Judentums (Leiden: Brill)
O
   T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
R
   SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
N
   IV The New International Version (1978)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
R
   B Revue biblique
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
     New Testament
Z
  KT Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie
S
  T Studia theologica
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
R
   SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
N
   T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
V
   is. Visions
S
  im. Similitudes
Philo, Philo, De Somniis
S
  om. Philo, De Somniis
2
  -3 Apoc. Bar. Syriac, Greek Apocalypse of Baruch
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QSb Appendix B (Blessings) to 1QS
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
Z
  KT Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
l
 it. literally
A
  V Authorized (King James) Version = KJV
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  T Studia theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ib Biblica
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
   d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
li
  t. literally
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
F
   TS Frankfurter Theologische Studien
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
    F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
LS
   J Liddell-Scott-Jones, Greek-English Lexicon
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  T New Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
S
  T Studia theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
S
  T Studia theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
LS
   J Liddell-Scott-Jones, Greek-English Lexicon
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
BDF
     F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
l
 it. literally
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
G
  uL Geist und Leben
a
   a. Throughout Colossians there is some doubt about the correct reading between the first
and second person plurals (cf. 1:7; 2:13 and this text). Here it is possible that hJmw`n (―our‖),
which is supported by B Dc H K 326 syrp,h copsa etc;, was altered by scribes to uJnw`n so as to
bring it into line with the second person pronouns throughout verses 1–4. However, the
reading uJmw`n (―your‖) has considerably stronger manuscript support, including P46 and
good representatives of both the Alexandrian and Western text types (a
  C D* F G P 31 81 it vg copbo etc; cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 624). Accordingly, if
uJmw`n (―your‖) was the original reading the change to hJmw`n (―our‖) may have been due to
faulty hearing or because the copyist wished to maintain the point that Christ is the life of
Christians generally and not simply of those at Colossae. On balance it seems more likely
that the reading ―our life‖ (hJ zwh; uJmw`n) was the original text and was altered very early to
conform to the second person style of this section of the letter.
c
  f. confer,compare
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
H
   Holiness Code
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
s
  yr Syriac language or text version of the OT, (as published in the Peshitta Insitute edition,
1980)
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
F
   Codex Ambrosíanus
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
P
   Pesher (commentary)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
S
  BLMS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Monograph Series
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  T New Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
AV A
     uthorized (King James) Version = KJV
K
  JV King James Version (1611) = AV
c
  f. confer,compare
AV A
     uthorized (King James) Version = KJV
K
  JV King James Version (1611) = AV
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  B Theologische Beiträge
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
H
  TKNT Herders theologischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
W
   UNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament (Tübingen: Mohr)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  GSU Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Spätjudentums und Urchristentums
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TAbh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
a
   a. ejpi; tou;" uiJou;" th`" ajpeiqeiva". Although there is widespread and early testimony
supporting the longer reading which includes these words ―upon the sons of disobedience‖
(a
  A C D F etc, most miniscules, it vg copbo and several other versions) it is likely that they
represent an intrusion into the text from Ephesians 5:6, and were omitted by P46 B copsah
and several of the fathers. The phrase is a Hebraism, meaning ―disobedient people‖ and
denotes those whose lives are characterized by defiance of the law of God (contrast 1 Pet
1:14, ―children of obedience‖).
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
F
   Codex Ambrosíanus
P
   Pesher (commentary)
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
2
   Apoc. Bar. Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
M
   agn. Ignatius, Letter to the Magnesians
2
   Clem 2 Clement
1QS
      (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
N
  T New Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
N
  T New Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
l
 it. literally
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
Philo, Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
S
  pec. Leg. Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
1
  QpHab Pesher on Habakbuk from Qumran Cave 1
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
O
  T Old Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
i.
   e. id est, that is
O
   T Old Testament
e
   .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
e
   .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
N
   TS New Testament Studies
e
   .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
R
   SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
N
   T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  T Studia theologica
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
a
   13.a. The reading kuvrio" (―Lord‖) which has the strong support of P46 as well as the best
witnesses of both the Alexandrian and Western texts (A B D* G itd,g vg etc) was
interpreted, quite correctly, by copyists as Cristov" (―Christ‖). But the latter is not the
original reading; nor are the other variants (feov", ―God,‖ and feo;" ejn Cristw`/, ―God in
Christ‖) which seem to be scribal assimilations to Ephesians 4:32 (Metzger, Textual
Commentary, 625; cf. Moule, 123, and Lohse, 148).
b
   16.b. In place of the unusual expression ―the Word of Christ,‖ several witnesses substitute
the more customary ―the Word of God‖ or ―the Word of the Lord.‖ In addition Cristou`
(―of Christ‖) has the strong support of P46 a
c
   B C2 D G etc
c
   16.c. The Textus Receptus in accordance with Ephesians 5:19 reads tw`/ kurivw/ (―to the
Lord‖). But the early and widespread manuscript evidence is in favor of tw`/ uew`/ (―to God‖:
P46 a
  A B C* D* etc).
d
   17.d. The unusual expression of tw`/ qew`/ patriv (―to God the Father‖), which has
widespread support P46 (apparently) a
  A B C 81 etc, was emended by copyists who inserted kaiv (―and‖) to bring it into line with
Ephesians 5:20 (note 1:3 and 12).
P
   Pesher (commentary)
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
v
  g Latin Vulgate (as published in Weber‘s edition)
c
  f. confer,compare
P
   Pesher (commentary)
B
   Codex Vaticanus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
P
   Pesher (commentary)
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
1
  QpHab Pesher on Habakbuk from Qumran Cave 1
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
l
 it. literally
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
1
  QM  (War Scroll) from Qumran
O
  T Old Testament
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
i
 .e. id est, that is
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  . Levi Testament of Levi (from Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs)
T
  . Zeb Testament of Zebulun (in T. 12 Patr.)
T
  . Napht. Testament of Naphtali
T
  . Zeb Testament of Zebulun (in T. 12 Patr.)
N
  T New Testament
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  . Zeb Testament of Zebulun (in T. 12 Patr.)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
1
  QH  (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
1
  QS  (Rule of the Community, Manual of Discipline)
N
  T New Testament
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
H
  eb. Hebrew
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
A
  V Authorized (King James) Version = KJV
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  O Symbolae osloenses
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  S New Series
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
G
  uL Geist und Leben
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  TANT Abhandlungen zur Theologie des Alten und Neuen Testaments
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
AV
    Authorized (King James) Version = KJV
RV
    Revised Version, 1881–85
RS
   V Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NE
   B The New English Bible
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  V Authorized (King James) Version = KJV
RV
    Revised Version, 1881–85
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
o
  pt optative
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
c
  f. confer,compare
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
N
  T New Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
O
  T Old Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
O
  T Old Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
cf
   . confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c.
   circa (about, approximately)
l
 it. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
NT
   Abh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
N
  S New Series
i
 .e. id est, that is
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
NT
    New Testament
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
    TS New Testament Studies
I
    DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
N
  TS New Testament Studies
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
c
  f. confer,compare
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
UN
    T Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
P
  ol. Ignatius, Letter to the Polycarp
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
OT
    Old Testament
O
  T Old Testament
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
NI
   DNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  TS New Testament Studies
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
A
  B Anchor Bible (New York: Doubleday)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  EE Zeitschrift für evangelische Ethik
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
Z
  EE Zeitschrift für evangelische Ethik
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
R
   evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
OT
    Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
R
   evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
li
  t. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
   T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
   SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
Philo, Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
S
   pec. Leg. Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
c
  f. confer,compare
A
   nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
c
  f. confer,compare
N
   TS New Testament Studies
N
   T New Testament
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NEB
     The New English Bible
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
NT
    New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
l
 it. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
RS
   V Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NEB
     The New English Bible
AV
    Authorized (King James) Version = KJV
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  Z Theologische Zeitschrift (ThZ)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
Philo, Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
S
  pec. Leg. Philo, De Specialibus Legibus
NCB
     New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BAG
     W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BAG
     W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 UÅ Lunds universitets årsskrift
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  EB The New English Bible
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
2
   Clem 2 Clement
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  T Studia theologica
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
a
   a. The reading i[na guw`te ta; peri; hJmw`n (―that you may know how we are‖) has strong
manuscript support (e.g. A B D* G P etc, that is, good representatives of the Alexandrian,
Western and Eastern text types) and it best explains the origin of the other readings.
Furthermore, this reading is consistent with the writer‘s declared purpose of Tychicus‘s
visit (vv 7, 9). For further details see Metzger, Textual Commentary, 626.
b
   b. th;n katÆ oikon aujth`" ejkklhsivan. ―Nympha and the church that is in her house.‖ The
uncertainty of the gender of the name Nuvmfa (feminine ―Nympha‖) or Numua`" (masculine
―Nymphas‖) led to variation in the following possessive pronoun between aujth`" (―her‖)
and aujtou` (―his‖). Lightfoot, 241, suggested the original reading was aujtw`n (―their,‖ so a
  A C P 33 81 Bohairic, Coptic, etc) and that the original text read ―Nymphas and his
friends,‖ which later copyists altered, not realizing it was a common classical construction.
This, however, has been rejected by recent commentators (Mussner, ad loc., is an
exception, supposing that the two names represent those of a married couple whose house
was a meeting-place for Christian worship) on the grounds that the manuscript evidence is
not sufficiently cogent (Moule, 28; cf. Metzger, Textual Commentary, 627: ―The reading
with aujtw`n [‗their‘] arose when copyists included ajdelfouv" [‗brothers‘] in the
reference‖). Several modem translations (RSV, NEB, JB, NIV) prefer the feminine
Nympha and render our expression ―the church in her house‖ (this is the preference of the
UBS Greek New Testament, based chiefly on the weight of B 6 424c 1739 1877 1881 etc,
so Metzger, Textual Commentary, 627). Lightfoot, 241, argued that the feminine is ―in the
highest degree improbable‖ because of its Doric form, but the denial was countered by
Moulton (Grammar 1, 48) who saw here an Attic feminine form with a short alpha, and not
the Doric form with a long alpha. It is possible that some scribes, considering the mention
of a woman here rather unusual, altered the ―her‖ to ―his.‖ Although the case for Nymphas
as a man‘s name has been strongly presented by Moule, 28, and Masson, 156, on balance it
seems preferable to understand the proper noun as feminine so that the phrase be rendered:
―Nympha and the church that is in her house.‖
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
B
   Codex Vaticanus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
P
   Pesher (commentary)
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
P
   Pesher (commentary)
c
  f. confer,compare
RS
   V Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
NE
   B The New English Bible
JB
    A. Jones (ed.), Jerusalem Bible
NI
   V The New International Version (1978)
B
   Codex Vaticanus
c
  f. confer,compare
LX
   X The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
RSV
     Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
T
  EV Today‘s English Version
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  D Studies and Documents
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NT
    New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
KJ
   V King James Version (1611) = AV
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
S
  E Studia Evangelica 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ( = TU 73 [1959], 87 [1964], 88 [1964], 102 [1968],
103 [1968], 112 [1973]
NT
    New Testament
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
NT
    New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
S
  CM Student Christian Movement
c
  f. confer,compare
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NT
    New Testament
N
  T New Testament
O
  T Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  T New Testament
OT
    Old Testament
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
B
  U Biblische Untersuchungen
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
     B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
A
   TR Anglican Theological Review
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
i.
   e. id est, that is
N
   T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NC
     B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
H
   TR Harvard Theological Review
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
MM
      J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
    G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
   DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
B
   ibLeb Bibel und Leben
a
    a. The phrase ejn hJmi`n (―among us‖) is not as well supported in the manuscript tradition
(A C D K y etc) as ejn uJmi`n (―among you‖) which is read by the Textus Receptus and other
important manuscripts (P61 a
   G P 33 etc). However, the former is preferred since it is more expressive, binding Paul to
the addressee, and it is more likely that copyists would have changed hJmi`n (―us‖) to uJmi`n
(―you‖) to bring it into line with the other second person pronouns in the paragraph.
A
    Codex Alexandrinus
C
    Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
    Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
P
   Pesher (commentary)
G
   Greek translation: as published in Septuaginta, LXX ed. A. Rahlfs, 1935. In Daniel, G
includes both OG and Th, as published in J. Ziegler‘s ed., 1954.
P
   Pesher (commentary)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  EB The New English Bible
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
N
  T New Testament
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
i
 .e. id est, that is
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
c
  f. confer,compare
I
  nt Interpretation
i
 .e. id est, that is
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
i
 .e. id est, that is
l
 it. literally
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
l
 it. literally
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
c
  f. confer,compare
H
  TR Harvard Theological Review
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
E
  vT Evangelische Theologie
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
a
   a. Although the general sense of the verse is clear the manuscript tradition has no uniform
reading. That of a
*
   A 33 best explains the origin of the other readings. proslabou` (―receive,‖ from v 17) was
introduced by copyists to smooth out the syntax, as also was the addition of su (―you‖). See
Metzger, Textual Commentary, 655, 656, and Lohse, 201; see below on the apparently
redundant aujtovn (―him‖).
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
i
 .e. id est, that is
l
 it. literally
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
L
  XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
N
  T New Testament
e
  .g. exempli gratia, for example
N
  EB The New English Bible
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  EB The New English Bible
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
i
 .e. id est, that is
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
N
  T New Testament
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
OT
    Old Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
b
  Sanh. Babylonian Talmud: tractate Sanhedrin
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  tr-B H. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, 4 vols. (Munich:
Beck‘sche, 1926–28)
V
  is. Visions
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
e.
   g. exempli gratia, for example
H
  TR Harvard Theological Review
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
N
  T New Testament
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
P
  Oxy Oxyrhynchus Papyri
P
  Fay  Papyri
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
NT
    New Testament
E
  vT Evangelische Theologie
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
A
  nt Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
NIV
     The New International Version (1978)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
H
  TKNT Herders theologischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
L
 XX The Septuagint, Greek translation of the OT
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
R
  SV Revised Standard Version (NT 1946, OT 1952, Apoc 1957)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
O
  T Old Testament
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
c
  f. confer,compare
S
  BLDS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Dissertation Series
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
i
 .e. id est, that is
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
l
 it. literally
B
  Z Biblische Zeitschrift
LS
   J Liddell-Scott-Jones, Greek-English Lexicon
c
  f. confer,compare
MM
     J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament (London:
Hodder, 1930)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
NT
    New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
P
  Oxy Oxyrhynchus Papyri
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
N
  T New Testament
c
  f. confer,compare
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
BD
   F F. Blass, A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New
Testament(University of Chicago/University of Cambridge, 1961)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
i
 .e. id est, that is
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
a
   a. he Textus Receptus adds hJmw`n, ―our,‖ after kurivou, ―Lord‖: so A C D K 614 it vg etc If
the pronoun was present originally, then it is hard to explain its omission in a
  P 33 81 and others. On the other hand, scribes were prone to introduce these sorts of
expansions. The shorter reading is preferred (see Metzger, Textual Commentary, 658).
b
   b. Several manuscripts (a
  C Dc), versions and Fathers append a liturgical ajmhvn (―Amen‖), but good representatives
of the Alexandrian and Western text types (A D* 048 33 81 1881) have resisted this
tendency.
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
K
   Kethib (the written consonantal Hebrew text of OT)
v
  g Latin Vulgate (as published in Weber‘s edition)
P
   Pesher (commentary)
C
   Codex Ephraemi Syri
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
A
   Codex Alexandrinus
D
   Codex Bezae or Deuteronom(ist)ic
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
c
  f. confer,compare
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
c
  f. confer,compare
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
c
  f. confer,compare
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
BA
   G W. Bauer, W. F. Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, (Chicago:
Chicago U. P., 1979)
i
 .e. id est, that is
N
  T New Testament
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
NC
    B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
c
  f. confer,compare
T
  DNT G. Kittel and G. Friedrich, eds., tr. G. W. Bromiley Theological Dictionary of the
New Testament, 10 vols., ET (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964–76)
IC
   C International Critical Commentary (Edinburgh/New York: Clark/Scribner‘s)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
I
  B The Interpreter‘s Bible, ed. G. A. Buttrick (12 vols.; Nashville: Abingdon, 1951-57)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
NI
   CNT New International Commentary on the New Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
TN
   TC Tyndale New Testament Commentaries
N
  TD Das Neue Testament Deutsch
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
H
  NT Handbuch zum Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
RN
   T Regensburger Neues Testament
N
  TD Das Neue Testament Deutsch
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d(s). editor(s), edited by; edition
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
C
  NT Commentaire du Nouveau Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
NI
   CNT New International Commentary on the New Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
W
   C Westminster Commentary
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
EK
   KNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
MN
    TC Moffatt NT Commentary
EK
   KNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
N
  TTS New Testament Tools and Studies
IC
   C International Critical Commentary (Edinburgh/New York: Clark/Scribner‘s)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  B Anchor Bible (New York: Doubleday)
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
S
  ANT Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
R
  B Revue biblique
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  JLA Studies in Judaism in Late Antiquity (Leiden: Brill)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
T
  Z Theologische Zeitschrift (ThZ)
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
A
  TANT Abhandlungen zur Theologie des Alten und Neuen Testaments
G
  uL Geist und Leben
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
    The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  JT American Journal of Theology
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  tBibT Studia biblica et theologica
F
  BBS Facet Books, Biblical Series
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
Co
   nB Coniectanea biblica (Lund: Gleerup)
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  T Studia theologica
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  T Studia theologica
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
SH
   AW Sitzungsberichte heidelbergen Akademie der Wissenschaften
N
  T New Testament
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
S
  T Studia theologica
N
  TS New Testament Studies
W
   UNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament (Tübingen: Mohr)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  E Studia Evangelica 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ( = TU 73 [1959], 87 [1964], 88 [1964], 102 [1968],
103 [1968], 112 [1973]
NC
   B New Century Bible [Commentary] (new ed.)
B
  U Biblische Untersuchungen
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
S
  T Studia theologica
S
  O Symbolae osloenses
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
A
  TANT Abhandlungen zur Theologie des Alten und Neuen Testaments
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
S
  D Studies and Documents
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
H
  TKNT Herders theologischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
NT
   Abh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
N
  S New Series
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
Z
  EE Zeitschrift für evangelische Ethik
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
K
  D Kerygma und Dogma
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TF Neutestamentliche Forschungen
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
S
  BLMS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Monograph Series
T
  U TU Texte und Untersuchungen
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
A
  TR Anglican Theological Review
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
Z
  EE Zeitschrift für evangelische Ethik
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
W
   UNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament (Tübingen: Mohr)
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
B
  EvT Beiträge zur evangelischen Theologie
S
  BM Stuttgarter biblische Monographien
Z
  KT Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie
WU
    NT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament (Tübingen: Mohr)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  UNT Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
S
  NT Studien zum Neuen Testament
A
  SNU Acta seminarii neotestamentici upsaliensis
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
N
  TS New Testament Studies
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
R
  SR Recherches de science religieuse
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BLSBS SBL Sources for Biblical Study
MT
     The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
B
  ib Biblica
c
  f. confer,compare
B
  ib Biblica
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
N
  TS New Testament Studies
O
  TM Oxford Theological Monographs
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
N
  TS New Testament Studies
T
  B Theologische Beiträge
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  IDNTT C. Brown, ed., The New International Dictionary, of New Testament Theology, 3
vols. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975–78)
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
S
  ANT Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  Q Theologische Quartalschrift
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  T New Testament
A
  USS Andrews University Seminary Studies
N
  ovT Novum Testamentum
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
S
  WJT Southwestern Journal of Theology
T
  TS Trier theologische Studien
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
S
  T Studia theologica
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  TR Reformed Theological Review
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
N
  TS New Testament Studies
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  TS New Testament Studies
S
  HVL Skrifter Utgivna Av Kungl. Humanistika Vetenskapssamfundet i Lund
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
R
  evExp Review and Expositor
S
  T Studia theologica
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TS New Testament Studies
R
  TR Reformed Theological Review
ed
   . edited, edition(s), editor
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
B
  WANT Beiträge zur Wissenschaft vom Alten und Neuen Testament
(Stuttgart:Kolhammer)
E
  xpTim The Expository Times
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
N
  TS New Testament Studies
T
  hA Theologische Arbeiten
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
Z
  TK Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
N
  TS New Testament Studies
I
  DBSup Interpreter‘s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume, ed. K. Crim
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1976)
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
A
  GSU Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Spätjudentums und Urchristentums
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
E
  KKNT Evangelisch-katholischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
T
  hBer Theologische Berichte
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
V
  T Vetus Testamentum
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
R
  elS Religious Studies
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
F
  TS Frankfurter Theologische Studien
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
SP
   CK Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge
F
  RLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und Neuen Testaments
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck)
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
N
  TAbh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
NS
    New Series
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
N
  TS New Testament Studies
N
  ovTSup Supplement(s) to Novum Testamentum
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
N
  TAbh Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
R
  B Revue biblique
W
   MANT Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen Testament (Neukirchen:
Neukirchener)
UN
   T Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
S
  NT Studien zum Neuen Testament
S
  BLDS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Dissertation Series
MT
    The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
N
  S New Series
S
  NTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
J
  TS Journal of Theological Studies
I
  nt Interpretation
A
  LGHJ Arbeiten zur Literatur und Geschichte des hellenistischen Judentums (Leiden: Brill)
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
G
  uL Geist und Leben
B
  Sac Bibliotheca Sacra
E
  vQ The Evangelical Quarterly
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
J
  BL Journal of Biblical Literature
S
  BLDS Society of Biblical Literature [SBL] Dissertation Series
MT
    The Masoretic Text [of the Old Testament] (as published in BHS)
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
H
  TR Harvard Theological Review
T
  LZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
B
  U Biblische Untersuchungen
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
I
  nt Interpretation
B
  Z Biblische Zeitschrift
C
  BQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
A
  nBib Analecta biblica (Rome: PBI)
S
  BT Studies in Biblical Theology (London/Naperville, IL: SCM/Allenson)
SC
   M Student Christian Movement
E
  vT Evangelische Theologie
B
  ZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft [ZNW]
B
  JRL Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester
e
  d. edited, edition(s), editor
Z
  NW Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
B
  ibLeb Bibel und Leben
i
 O‘Brien, Peter T., Word Biblical Commentary, Volume 44: Colossians, Philemon, (Dallas,
Texas: Word Books, Publisher) 1998.
